---
title: Gilman’s Garden
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
profname: Austin Graham
coursename: MA Thesis Draft
date: March 14, 2014
fontsize: 12pt
---

The relevance of the built environment and architectural design to Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s thinking has been well documented. Her campaigns in *Women and Economics* and *The Home: Its Work and Influence* to develop kitchenless households as a way to free women from domestic labour helped make her a pioneering figure in American feminism at the turn of the twentieth century. In “Standardizing Towns,” an essay that appeared alongside the third chapter of *Herland* in Gilman’s self-published magazine *The Forerunner*, seems almost like a much shorter version of Ebenezer Howard’s *Garden Cities of To-morrow*, which published a decade and a half prior to *Herland* and has had a significant effect on urban design as a route to social justice. Both take the possibility of a carefully constructed physical space as a way to instill progressive values: Howard does away with the *rentier* class to improve total quality of life (51), and Gilman suggests that “[l]ocal pride” should be “used to better advantage” in order to instill a new value, the “Minimum of Prosperity” (217-219). 

Yet why is it that, despite this emphasis on the built environment, Gilman’s primary mode of description in *Herland* is environmental? The garden, as a literal and metaphorical descriptor of the society, appears again and again to answer this question. Throughout much of her life, Gilman kept a garden---a “vegetable garden mind you!, not merely flowers”---at one point using it as a means of subsistence in the lean pecuniary conditions of her later years, at another referring to it as her “sanitarium” (*Selected Letters* 180, 281, 284).  The relevance of these experiences to *Herland* is clear. From the first, the land is described as “a land in a state of perfect cultivation, where even the forests looked as if they were cared for; a land that looked like an enormous park, only that it was even more evidently an enormous garden” (42). It is the management of the land, the coincidence of the built and natural environment, that causes the narrator Vandyck Jennings to see that this land is in some way different from any that he has seen in wilderness. Looking down from cliff-edge of the lush, “petted” forest of Herland, the natural world as it exists in his previous world appears to Vandyck as “a far-off marshy tangle of rank vegetation”: undifferentiated and tangled, singularly uninviting, of no conceivable use (67). Exactly what Gilman means by the “garden” contrasted to this “rank vegetation”---what type or how *many* types of garden---is never explored by a text that is otherwise quite eager to explain itself. The garden is at times a breadbasket as in sustenance gardens, at times a source of relaxation as in the English landscape garden, and at times a prison. ^[ ([quote about food-bearing trees])([terry captured quote] \[male cat quote])]

The understanding of the society as itself a kind of garden surmounts and contains all these, however, and taking this image as a conceptual frame for the rest of the utopian vision re-contextualizes its defining features. In all its appearances the garden appears as a space that is simultaneously built and natural, a source of food and material that is neither agricultural nor industrial without being entirely separate from either. Additionally, the garden is an eminently public space, with maintenance and ownership shared by all members of society, and the communal construction of environment that results is central to all aspects of life in Herland. One passage, in which a Herlander describes realizing her place in the community and the environment, is particularly revealing of the way this garden organizes the economy and the Herlanders’ view of labor:

>“It was a butterfly that made me a forester,” said Ellador. “I was about eleven years old, and I found a big purple and green butterfly on a low flower. I caught it, very carefully, by the closed wings, as I had been told to do, and carried it to the nearest insect teacher---” ([Van] made a note there to ask her what on earth an insect teacher was) “to ask her its name. She took it from me with a little cry of delight. ‘Oh, you blessed child…. This is a female of the obernut moth,’ she told me, ‘they are almost gone. We have been trying to exterminate them for centuries. If you had not caught this one, it might have laid eggs enough to raise worms enough to destroy thousands of our nut trees---thousands of bushels of nuts,---and make years and years of trouble for us.’…I grew a foot, it seemed to me, and determined then and there to be a forester.” (123)

On the narrative level, this passage reverses the expectation of a clichéd, sentimental understanding of conservation to reveal an ideology of environmental management. The tender, careful handling of the frail creature will ultimately culminate, we realize, in the creature’s death, the last stage in a deliberate extinction. This reversal effectively replaces reverence for the natural world with a view of it as something to be managed so as to yield the most desirable possible system. Understanding that the obernut moth and the obernut cannot coexist, and realizing that the obernut is Herland’s “best food-nut,” they create the system that benefits them most, a situation in which nurturing the environment will mean nurturing themselves (123). It is also important to note what this reveals about the nature of labor, professional identity, and economy in Herland. Ellador is telling the story of her professional self-realization---the moment that she conceives of herself in terms of her role in the economy---but it is also the moment at which she realizes her place in the ecological system. Considered in terms of labor, such a “forester” is a peculiar entity: she not quite an agricultural producer, and yet her actions contribute to the sufficient supply of food. She is not exactly employed by the state, and yet her function to the community is clear. Her duties are framed in terms of maintaining the environment, and yet in doing so she is also maintaining herself---both materially, by providing food for herself as well as others, and mentally, by coming into her identity. The ambiguity of this form of labor is resolved by a foundational but submerged concept in *Herland*, which is the idea of a garden economy: a system in which the thing produced is environment, not commodity; in which, as a result, production and consumption disappear as discrete entities; and which culminates in the gradual subsumption of labor into being.

One result of this collapse of environmental production into self-sustenance is that the replication of society through reproduction becomes, in part, an economic activity. In her nonfiction writings such as *Women and Economics*, Gilman urged such a consideration of motherhood, and in *Herland* motherhood is taken as the fundamental contribution to the collective, but one that is depersonalized and subject to division of labor.^[This aspect of the novel has been much discussed in Gilman scholarship, as has the understanding of motherhood as an ecological and systemic process. See Alex Shishin’s “Gender and Industry in Herland” and Katherine Fusco’s “Systems, Not Men: Producing People in *Herland*.”] Understanding the magical, parthenogenetic reproductive capacity of the Herlanders as an extension of the garden economy, however, suggests a mutual reinforcement of human and environmental development . Indeed, Gilman’s view of evolution, largely inherited from Lester F. Ward,^[As Cynthia J. Davis argues in “His and Herland,” discussed below.] is a semi-Lamarckian position that emphasizes the role of environment on human evolution. In considering education as a fundamental part of the social environment as well as a way to guide the management of the physical environment, Gilman depicts a society that, in determining its environment’s development, determines its *own* development. This control of evolutionary forces becomes a means of gaining individual agency despite conceding a type of determinism; paradoxically, this individual agency can only be gained through collective action, the participation in an ecological system.

The grounds of Gilman’s discussion---biological and environmental determinism, the effects of competition on social development, and the relevance of evolutionary theory to economic life, to name a few---invite a reading of *Herland* in terms of literary naturalism. Jennifer L. Fleissner, in her *Women, Compulsion, Modernity*, provides it. Considering some of the garden-like aspects of *Herland* in relation to the garden that surrounds the house of “The Yellow Wallpaper,” a “liminal space, neither home nor wilderness” that “solves the problem of the too-natural ‘outside’ and the too-cultural ‘inside,’” Fleissner argues that *Herland* should be seen as “a ‘realist’ response on Gilman’s part to the troubling ‘naturalist’ vision of the attempt at order manifested in her own earlier story” (95). In this reading, the obsessional need to order that is so crippling (because its realization is impossible) in “The Yellow Wallpaper” becomes the foundation of Gilman’s imagined community, and compulsive domesticity drives “the utopian social vision that would render the earlier story an obsolete relic” (87-95). The comparison of these two gardens persuasively represents the relationship of the two stories, and this essay is far from disputing that powerful reading. Instead, by focusing on the garden of *Herland* as it functions independently in the novel, I hope to show that Gilman’s intervention on the writings and ideologies of “masculine” naturalism adheres to a structure foundational to the utopian genre: a counterpoint of satirizing the present and depicting a distant alternative. The present that Gilman satirizes, I will argue, is masculinist writing of the type that can be called naturalism or the “historical romance” (in Fleissner’s terms), and the distant alternative is *Herland*’s garden economy.

In what follows, I will argue that Charlotte Perkins Gilman uses the garden as a framing device to depict a system in which the management of environment replaces production and consumption, allowing freedom from labor and collective control over the forces determining social and evolutionary development. In the first section, I will show that the ecological balance of the built and natural environments allows for a garden economy in which labor, subsumed into being, disappears as an exploitative activity. In the second section, I will argue that this relationship to the environment is a way for the Herlanders to maintain individual agency in the spite of Gilman’s belief in evolutionary determinism, and that education becomes a key to controlling biological development of the earth as a whole. In the final section, I will return to the relationship of *Herland* to literary naturalism to point out the way that the naturalist themes and the garden with which Gilman revises them relate to a traditional structure of the utopian genre, ultimately situating the garden as a model for social reform.
 
 ***
 
Before an analysis of the environment in *Herland* can take place, some description is in order. As in many utopian works, the author herself provides the basic description of the natural and built environment. Hers is a particularly cartographical description because the three male protagonists view it from the air---one of them, wealthy, brought a biplane on their expedition---in order to get “the lay of the land” (41). Here they see that the land is confined to a triangular “high-standing spur” rising out of the “dark green sea of crowding forest” around it (41). The sense of obstruction is reinforced on the far end by “white-crowned peaks in the distance, themselves probably inaccessible”---topographical features that do not reappear in the narrative and seem to be included purely for the effect of sublimity and obstruction. As for the land itself: “It appeared to be well forested about the edges, but in the interior there were wide plains, and everywhere parklike meadows and open places”; “closely cultivated gardens” also mark the interior plains (42, 47). Vandyck notes the presence of cities without giving a sense of their number or spatial orientation, but there are indications later of that very similar, uniformly small cities are spread throughout the country.^[See, for example, the men’s lecture circuit partway through the novel.] The relegation of the forest to the edges of Herland is important both symbolically and practically. Its marginality is maintained as part of its essential character, as it is as far from urban space as it is possible for a Herlander to go, but it also prevents the forest from impeding travel through the interior. This practical function is underscored by the presence of “clean, well-built roads,” the unhindered view from “the edge of the open country” through field glasses, and the speed with which three Herlanders on foot are able to distance themselves from the male intruders (42, 47). Open space allows infrastructural, visual, and physical links between the disparate groups of Herlanders apparently contained in clusters of urban space. This deliberate organization of the land into forest, open space, and urban space is foregrounded from the beginning, and it is partially this division that gives Van the sense that the land “looked like an enormous park, only that it was even more evidently an enormous garden” (42). The organization also subtly introduces the entirely managed character of the country, with the function of space itself being defined teleologically---not, for once, an erroneous conception of the natural, as this utopian vision is of a land that truly *is* teleologically constructed, in contrast to the actual wilderness.

Nowhere is this contrast of the utopian, cultivated nature with actual wildness more evident than the marginal forested space, where it is underscored by the voiced amazement of the three male outsiders. In Van’s initial impressions, he points out, astonished, that “even the forests looked as if they were cared for” (42). Later, Terry says, “I never saw a forest so petted, even in Germany. Look, there’s not a dead bough---the vines are trained---actually!...[The trees are f]ood-bearing, practically all of them.... The rest splendid hard-wood. Call this a forest? It’s a truck farm!” (44). The word “cultivated” is repeated many times with reference to every aspect of the landscape, flora and fauna alike, as well as the tiny gardens that dot the open plains---at one point the forests are referred to simply as “the cultivated area” (66). The forested area is the breadbasket of the rest of the country, as is born out by Terry’s comment that it is a “truck farm,” another name for a market-garden (OED “truck”).^[This somewhat obsolete term also indicates produce grown for non-commercial purposes, and is in the orbit of definitions of “truck” as bartered (thus non-market) goods (OED “truck”).] Later, the character of the forest is shown to be a necessary result of Herland’s situation as a “little shut-in piece of land where one would have thought an ordinary people would have been starved out long ago or reduced to an annual struggle for life” (104). 

The Herland forest, though, is n system of agricultural production, despite its “pettedness,” and it is clear that the space retains its wildness despite some measure of cultivation. This peculiar coexistence is revealed during the men’s escape attempt, when Vandyck says, “Mighty lucky it was that we could live off the country as we did. Even that margin of forest seemed rich in food-stuffs” (67). On one hand, the idea of living “off the country” invokes an inapplicable paradigm of hunter-gatherer like woodsmanship. But what it also underscores is that the land has itself become a kind of pantry without losing its status as an exterior space. Elsewhere, when Vandyck learns more about the cultivation that constitutes “foresting” as a profession, it is revealed that what the process entails is less a planting of produce than the creation of a desirable environment entire. In some cases this entails “the deliberate replanting of an entire forest area with different kinds of trees”---an unimaginably vast displacement that nevertheless results in a functioning ecosystem, and one that, with respect to their needs as a people, has been improved (104). In many other cases environmental improvement runs still deeper, achieving ecological balance in a system that includes the product of the built environment---the urban space. Because they essentially compost their entire waste material (and do not produce waste that cannot be composted), “an increasingly valuable soil [is] built, instead of the progressive impoverishment so often seen in the rest of the world” (105). The development of the environment is allowed to proceed naturally, but the conditions are set such that wild development adheres to a plan. The environment that determines this growth (the soil) is altered in such a way that development is both bolstered and guided by ecological balance between the natural and built environments.

Considering the relation of the forest to the urban spaces in which most of the Herlanders live, it becomes clear that this harmony between the built and natural environments is in part a means of eliminating domestic labor. By linking these two projects, Gilman brings the domestic reform movements of the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century women’s movement into the context of ecological and economic sustainability. Throughout Gilman’s collected fiction and non-fiction writing, she sharply criticizes the relegation of women to the domestic sphere and the exploitation inherent in domestic labor.^[see (extensive list of works); maybe this is the place for the context of the cooperative household movements] The most programmatic of the resultant concepts is her campaign for the reform of domestic space, in particular the development of the kitchenless household. In *Women and Economics*, the very successful work of 1898 that made her reputation, she argues that “change in the economic position of woman from dependence to independence must bring with it a rearrangement of these home interests and industries” (224). Thus, she lays out a vision of “apartments…without kitchens” except those “belonging to the houes from which meals could be served to the families in their rooms or in a common dining-room” as a way of liberating the “hundreds of thousands of women in New York City alone who are wage-earners, and who also have families” (242-3). In a strikingly similar passage in *Herland*, Van says, “For food we either went to any convenient eating-house, ordered a meal brought in, or took it with us to the woods, always and equally good” (144). The relevance of this domestic reform advocacy to the utopian vision of Herland is unsurprising, but what *Herland* adds to the conversation is a consideration of these communal spaces as part of a larger, self-sustaining system. The communal kitchens are what nourish and revitalize the soil that in turn produces the material that those kitchens and their dependents need to survive. 

Domestic reform in this model becomes a means of making domestic labor part of a larger, self-perpetuating economy by eliminating the distinction of the interior and exterior. The disappearance of this boundary is presented in a conversation between Terry, the mouthpiece of domestic imprisonment, and Jeff, the character who eventually becomes a male Herlander and appears to speak for the Herland ideology: 

> “*Home!*” [Terry] sneered. “There isn’t a home in the whole pitiful place.”

> “There isn’t anything else, and you know it,” Jeff retorted hotly.

In Jeff’s explanation, “home” means so much that it has effectively become meaningless. If foresting is both the base of the Herland economy and part of making dinner, can it be called housework? If the kitchen and pantry circumscribe the world, is everything housework? The rhetorical question that Gilman repeatedly included in lectures to women’s clubs becomes paramount: “Shall the home be our world? or the world our home?” (qtd. in Allen 18). By 1915, when she was primarily writing rather than lecturing, her answer had become something between the two. She is decidedly ambivalent about the chances of Herland reforming the world beyond the enclave, and equally ambivalent about the viability of such a community in an environment too vast to be managed: the garden can only survive if its walls are high enough. Within those walls, however, domestic work becomes part of the work of the world. By limiting the size of that world and making it a closed system, domestic labor becomes subsumed by division of labor in a functional economy, as she proposed seventeen years earlier in *Women and Economics* (225-47). 

Insofar as it dissolves the barrier between domestic and productive labor, the garden-like management of the built and natural environment becomes a means of freeing Herland from market forces. A contrast with Walter Benn Michaels’s reading of “The Yellow Wallpaper” is illustrative here. He argues that the short story, published 1892, the woman’s body becomes a site “simultaneously of production and consumption…rewritten as the utopian body of the market economy” in which “products not only exist to be consumed, but coming into existence they already are consumed.” The simultaneous buying and selling, producing and consuming of the self conditional to *owning* oneself makes “exchange…the condition of [one’s] existence.” This “triumphant omnipresence of market relations” is, for Michaels, the cause of the character’s nervous breakdown (*The Gold Standard* 13). What is remarkable about the system depicted in *Herland* when seen in these terms is that it is almost exactly the same in the simultaneity and omnipresence of production and consumption---and it exists without market relations and without nervous breakdown. The framing of the built environment by the managed natural environment turns the conditions of a collapse into the conditions of a functioning society by replacing market forces with ecological balance. Money, exchange, and the marketplace are entirely absent from the narrative: unlike almost every other conspicuous absence, each of which is foregrounded by discussion between the outsiders and Herlanders, money never comes up after they enter Herland. ^[Prior to their foray money is mentioned indirectly, but only as a feature of the world beyond Herland: Terry’s family wealth bankrolls the expedition and provides the biplane.] By contrast, Howard’s *Garden Cities of To-morrow*, equally concerned with the self-sustaining quality of the utopian society, devotes whole chapters to the role of the market in the garden city. Even More’s *Utopia*, famous for its abnegation of a money economy, disposes of its surplus by participating in external economies---from which, Jameson points out, its force derives, as this abnegation is the site of greatest tension between the real and utopian worlds, the satire and the resolving social project (Jameson 23-24). Instead of harnessing market forces, Gilman makes the simultaneity of production and consumption, the sustainability of the society, and the utopian rejoinder to actually existing conditions all dependent on the managed environment---the garden.

A result of this elimination of the domicile and of market forces, the final use of the garden in Gilman’s version of social reform is as a means of dissolving labor into being, thereby eliminating it as an exploitative activity. The entirety of the garden system is devoted to the replication of the means of production, described by Marx^[Gilman, though proudly socialist, was emphatically not a Marxist; nevertheless, a Marxist paradigm is useful in describing the system she creates.] as a fundamental aspect of labor beyond which lies exploitation through the production of surplus value^[necessary to footnote labor theory of value?]. Put another way, the elimination of surplus that defines the closed system of the garden disallows exploitative labor. Any attempt to trace the industry of Herland leads one to ask: What do the Herlanders actually produce?^[Alex Shishin also asks this question, with a different but related answer: “If such an industrial base exists in Herland, we do not see it, nor hear or smell it. The same pleasant condition---a pronounced lack of industrial pollution and ugliness---is present in the two seminal utopian novels which preceded Herland: Edward Bellamy's *Looking Backward* (1888) and William Morris's *News from Nowhere* (1890). But while Bellamy and Morris offer explanations for this, Gilman does not” (“Gender and Industry in *Herland*” 101).] The only answer that obtains is: their environment, and only their environment. The environment produces trees, but, as Alex Shishin points out, these trees are in fact the means of production (“Gender and Industry in *Herland*” 100). And yet, Gilman’s account would seem to agree with Marx’s in the sense that the labor force is itself part of the means of production; certainly she positions the laboring Herlanders as a fundamental part of the ecology. When Herlanders are in a systemic balance with their environment, then, to say that all the Herlanders produce is the ecology itself is the same as to say that all they do is survive. In Gilman’s garden, production is subsumed by being. **[I think I should probably stick with this a bit longer, flesh out the means of production argument a bit more--the shift to the next section strikes me as abrupt.]**

***

What, then, is the place of the human in the environment---that of the producer or the product? Furthermore, how does this view of the garden come to bear on Gilman’s intermittent engagements with evolutionary theory? In answer to the first question, Katherine Fusco points out Gilman’s “insistence that the proper way to understand a person is as both product and part of a system” (“Systems, Not Men” 427). The industrial bent of this reading lends itself to the reading of a closed ecology in which the biological means of production reproduces itself.^[Her view of the system is as a primarily industrial system that she relates to Frederick Winslow Taylor’s *The Principles of Scientific Management*, though she does acknowledge that the mothers’ bodies exist in “a kind of [larger] ecosystem” (427).] 

Answering the second question necessarily leads one to address Gilman’s complicated relationship to eugenics.^[some brief examples of the scholarly documentation of this, of which there are many--look in the bibs of Davis, Fusco (?) and Fleissner; but also point to Fleissner’s re-historicization of it] The eugenic implications of a garden containing people would be hashed out by Gilman herself fifteen years after *Herland*, in an unpublished (perhaps unpublishable) article called “Gardening and the Baser Passions.” Though evidently an attempt at “humor”---or so it is described in a letter from Charlotte Barbour, one of Gilman’s editors at Putnam, explaining that the essay would not be accepted by horticulture journals---in such a grim context the effect is anything but. In sharp contrast to a sentimental view of the garden espoused early in the article, Gilman says that the main work of the gardener is not to plow, plant, or harvest---rather, “his main business, his longdrawn incessant effort, is to kill.” From this premise the rest of the essay spins off into a tirade, describing the many and various ways to kill, the necessity to “kill without ceasing” if the gardener’s “plants are to live,” and finally dissolving into a litany of the many organisms detrimental to the gardener’s efforts. Though it would be incorrect, as Cynthia Davis points out, to suggest that Gilman’s racism came about only in her more conservative old age, it seems to be the case that not until “her later years” did “Gilman [become] a decided proponent of eugenics” as she is in her essay on gardening (“His and Herland” 82). Indeed, this shift in the way she considers the literal garden is documented in her correspondence. In a letter to Alice Park on June 29th, 1928, some two years before the rejection of the “Gardening” essay and thirteen after publishing *Herland*, Gilman writes: 

>All May the planning and planting, all June the weed-weed-Weeding. I’ve changed my mind about the word “fighting” as applied to weed. If the desire to kill and desperate efforts thereto, against the ceaseless pressure of an en-enemy [*sic*], a million-headed enemy which rises up like Anteus is not a fight, what is it? (*Selected Letters* 272)

The role of humans as simultaneous producers and products of the environment is more complicated (if not more defensible) as it appears in *Herland* than the depiction of the gardener’s role in Gilman’s essay. It is rather her interest in the built environment, combined with her belief in almost total environmental determinism with regard to evolutionary development, that defines her treatment of biological change to species in Herland. Perhaps intentionally avoiding a discussion of race in the context of development, Gilman instead extends the effects of a managed environment beyond the purely social change espoused by the various domestic reform movements and into the biological realm. 

The more relevant document to Gilman’s evolutionary project in *Herland* is an article published only once, in *Circle Magazine* in 1908, “Modern Beatitudes---The Newness of the Earth.” Here, she suggests that the the earth and humanity are both mere children, growing into balance with one another. The evolution of the human race is framed here as a gradual accretion of understanding as to the effects of human activity on the earth---what we now would call an understanding of the anthropocene. After describing the gradual exhaustion of the earth’s resources by “our present methods,” Gilman reassures us that the process will not continue to its catastrophic conclusion: 

>We are waking up in good earnest in these days; ceasing to be a baby race, a set of ignorant, selfish, short-sighted infants, madly quarreling with one another over the fruits most easily gathered. We are young yet, but no longer mere children; young with the splendid hope and courage of youth, but not with the weakness and irresponsibility of infancy. (SL folder 129)

Humanity is saved, in this account, by its inevitable development into a wiser, more gentle race. Progress in this vision is not Herbert Spencer’s steady march from simplicity to complexity or the continued expansion of the race to the edges of the earth. It is instead a renunciation of wastefulness and destructive behavior, which is to be replaced by the more careful management of the natural environment. “There is absolutely nothing prevent us,” she continues in unmistakable anticipation of *Herland*, “from reforesting our hills, checking our floods, preserving our soils, maintaining the balance of nature plus the art and skill and learning of mankind.” The paradigm of the human struggling against the natural world is replaced by the simultaneous development of both realms. In framing this development in terms of the growth of the race, she implies a vision of evolution defined by an increase in balance, not an overcoming of opposition: refinement replaces dominance and expansion.

This optimistic article is far from explaining the means by which such a development would occur, though; Gilman’s thinking on the effect of environment on the development of the human race comes from Lester F. Ward, whose work is a key to understanding her thinking generally and *Herland* in particular. Cynthia J. Davis argues in “His and Herland” that the novel should be seen as an application of Ward’s thinking and her elaborations from it. The relevance of Ward’s thinking is undeniable: in addition to providing biographical support for the claim, Davis shows the evolutionary paradigm described in *Herland* maps neatly to Wards, and (most important for the purposes of this essay) so does the centrality of environmental factors in that paradigm. The basis of Ward’s environmental emphasis is his reluctance to accept Darwinism over Lamarckism---primarily, it would seem, because of his wariness of any biological theory that could promote “inaction and the pessimism that prompts it.” He, like Gilman, objected to Spencerian social Darwinism on the grounds that a competitive atmosphere and the behavior it encourages can only hinder human evolution (“His and Herland” 75). Embracing Lamarck’s paradigm of acquired traits being passed on to subsequent generations, anti-scientific though it certainly was given the definitive refutation of the theory some years prior to Ward’s writing, allows him to argue that human evolution had ceased at some point to be genetic and begun to be “telic”---or teleological, developed with an end in mind (“His and Herland” 75-6). Davis points out that Gilman goes even further than Ward with her emphasis on the role of environment in human evolution, saying that environment is Gilman’s “answer” to “why women had not flourished” and arguing that the limits imposed by environmental factors are “crucial to Gilman’s brand of determinism” (76). To the extent that environmental determinism does indeed displace biological determinism for Gilman as it did for Ward,^[Ward’s particular racism was predicated on a climatological understanding of race; in comparison to environmental factors, “biological differences, where and when they exist, were [to Ward] both insignificant and surmountable” (Davis “His and Herland” 83).] environment also displaces racial identity as the defining factor and ultimate goal in Gilman’s system of eugenics.

To this end, social and physical structures combine to effect an environment that leads to the most beneficial possible development of the Herland society: education in particular fills this role, and what Li-Wen Cheng identifies as the interdependence of nature and culture in *Herland* (342) is nowhere more evident than in the mutual reinforcement of the physical environment and the values, skills, and knowledge instilled by education. In the first place, it is made clear that education is considered as part of the evolutionary process. After Terry quotes August Weissmann’s refutation of Lamarckism, by which the Herlanders are emphatically unconvinced, we are presented with the state of their evolutionary theory (which, the context makes clear, is to be seen as superior to anything the men know):

>“If [Weissmann’s rebuttal] is so, then our improvement must be due either to mutation, or solely to education,” she gravely pursued. “We certainly have improved. It may be that all these higher qualities were latent in the original mother; that careful education is bringing them out; and that our personal differences depend on slight variations in prenatal condition.”

>“I think it is more in your accumulated culture,” Jeff suggested. “And in the amazing psychic growth you have made.” (103)

 At stake here are the comparative roles of genetics and culture to evolutionary development. The first sentence can be seen as a weighing of Darwinism against Lamarckism, but no clear conclusion is reached. The third possibility presents a unique synthesis, in which everyone descended from the original mother---to Herlanders, the whole world---contains dormant unrealized powers that only careful nurture can bring out: a decidedly reform-minded view that places emphasis on communal self-improvement. In this possibility, prenatal *conditions* rather than genetic makeup determine the distinctions between individuals, in another instance of environmental determinism being favored conclusively over biological determinism. Jeff’s suggestion, though, which effectively concludes the discussion, errs on the side of “culture” and the collective consciousness, both of which are instilled by education. Their system of education, furthermore, is designed to model and reinforce the dialectic with environment that so defines life in Herland. When asked about the system of education, the Herlander Somel says, “With the babies…we first provide an environment which feeds the mind without tiring it…. But as early as possible…we provide choices, simple choices, with very obvious causes and consequences” (128). The system of education graduates from an accretion of environmental understanding to the gradual understanding that human action affects that environment. Moreover, and crucially for the narrative crux discussed at the beginning of this essay, the second stage of education is achieved through *games* that “develop the faculties [they] wish to encourage”---games that are quickly contrasted with the destructive competitiveness of sports and the behavior of the men in the stone-throwing game (129). 
 
 The system of education, then, proceeds by the construction of educational environments, which ultimate instill understanding of how action determines environment. This understanding eventually leads again to the construction of an educating environment, and the cycle repeats until the culture is established by generations of reinforced behavior and knowledge. Since, in Gilman’s Wardian (and semi-Lamarckian) view of evolution, environment and culture rather than genetics determine the course of evolution, the mutually reinforcing loop between education and environment becomes a singularly determining process in the evolutionary history of Herland. Though there are exceptions, always situated in the past,^[See for example the elimination of unneeded species of livestock (75).] the garden of Herland does not proceed according to the maniacal weeding of Gilman’s later musings. The utopian vision instead imagines a situation in which the soil of society can be enriched, to the shared benefit of everything that grows from that soil. The conditions of this shared benefit, crucially, are a total restriction of competition and preference of the individual organism (human and non-human) over the system of which it is a part. This state is simultaneously the condition and product of Gilman’s social evolution. Gilman’s particular contributions to domestic and environmental reform, in tandem with the social environment that they instill, lead to a managed environmental determinism and teleological evolutionary development.**[similarly, this feels like a pretty quick turn without resolution. Perhaps I should relate this more directly to the first section and look for some way of elaborating on both as a result...?]**

***

I have argued thus far that Gilman’s garden has primarily two effects on the Herland society. The first is to liberate the individual from the economic domination by subsuming labor into being, a process that is achieved by displacing production and consumption with the production of environment. The second function of the garden, I argue, is to wring agency from determinism through collective control of the determining forces, a process that is possible because of Gilman’s belief that evolution is primarily social and that environment is singularly important in guiding its course. These functions of the garden taken together present a polemical subversion of naturalism similar to that described by Fleissner in *Women, Compulsion, Modernity*: the compulsive domesticity that she argues traps the protagonist of “The Yellow Wallpaper” and is resolved in *Herland*, can be seen as the framework in which this garden economy exists. The way that the garden acts as a counterpoint to the naturalist wilderness becomes clear only when it is considered as part of a utopian generic framework in which satirization of the present coexists with the suggestion of an ideal future. If we take certain strains of 1890s naturalist writing, and the evolutionary and deterministic thinking that undergirds much of it, as the present to which Gilman is responding, the role of the garden as a utopian paradigm becomes clear.

The relationship of Gilman to this body of literature is explicated in essay she published in *The Forerunner* in [year] called “Masculine Literature.” Gilman there outlines a vision of masculinist literature defined by “two main branches…the Story of Adventure, and the Love Story” (19). Along with “these tales of adventure, of struggle and difficulty; of hunting and fishing and fighting; of robbing and murdering, catching and punishing,” Gilman includes “the Adventures of Him in Pursuit of Her,” a narrative of pursuit that is heavily reminiscent of the “Rash Advances” chapter of *Herland* (“Masculine” 19-20). Discussing Christopher P. Wilson’s essay “Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s Steady Burghers,” Fleissner points out that “from a certain perspective, one can readily see why [Wilson] decides that Gilman’s essay constitutes an attack on naturalist fiction,” but explains that such a reading becomes difficult to sustain in light of Gilman’s own close relation to the views that define it (82-3). In Fleissner’s view, this difficulty is resolved in part by the idea that *Herland* marks Gilman’s turning away from her earlier naturalist writings. Focusing on the specifically formal aspects that Gilman describes in “Masculine Literature,” though, contextualizes the satirical elements of the novel’s beginning, and reveals its bifurcated utopian structure.

The target of *Herland*’s satire is competitive individualism. One treatment of the theme stands out particularly, not only as it works in itself but also because of the its structural significance to the novel. The moment comes in a passage partway through the novel, just after the men’s abortive escape attempt. When their plan, to return to their biplane and fly home, is spoiled by the revelation that the Herlanders have been aware of the attempt from the beginning, they are cajoled into a game that demonstrates the Herlanders’ differing conception of competition. The men’s captors (if they can be called that) halt their escape attempt and tempt them into a test of skill, setting up a pile of stones with a yellow nut on top for the purpose:

>They urged us to throw at it, and we did, but the thing was a long way off, and it was only after a number of failures, at which those elvish damsels laughed delightedly, that Jeff succeeded in bringing the whole structure to the ground. It took me still longer, and Terry, to his intense annoyance, came third.

>Then Celis set up the little tripod again, and looked back at us, knocking it down, pointing at it, and shaking her short curls severely. “No,” [Celis] said. “Bad---wrong!”…Then she set it up once more, put the fat nut on top, and returned to the others; and there those aggravating girls sat and took turns throwing little stones at that thing, while one stayed by as a setter-up; and they just popped that nut off, two times out of three, without upsetting the sticks. (69)

The contrast between the two performances is severalfold. The men’s idea of victory, for which they are reprimanded, destroys the elements of the game; the women strike only what they mean to, with minimal disruption to the structure. The men compete against each other and against the women, sulking when they lose and dividing among themselves; the women cooperate for the most efficient group performance, systematizing the resetting of the structure and taking turns, and their performance is described not according to the relative success of the members, but according to their aggregate success rate. In essence, the difference between the two types of competition is like the difference between boxing and a boat race: success of the individual in the men’s group leads to the failure of the rest of the group, while the success of a single Herlander leads to communal benefit. As if there were any doubt of this episode’s importance as a symbol, its lesson is quickly transferred back into the diegesis when the men get back around to their escape attempt, only to be met “from all around [by] the sturdy forms, the quiet determined faces, we knew so well”: “It was no use to fight. These women evidently relied on numbers; not so much as a drilled force, but as a multitude actuated by a common impulse” (70). It is essential to note that the men are not *defeated* by the larger and more powerful multitude. Rather, the question of defeat is preempted and disallowed. There is no fight because it is “no use to fight.” Military discipline is replaced by a “multitude actuated”: communal self-realization precludes individualist aggression. The conclusion to the episode is less a victory of cooperation over competition than it is a demonstration that competition is precluded by a purely cooperative total system.

In itself this event can be seen as an illustration of what is spelled out more explicitly elsewhere; the weight and function of it, though, derive from its placement at the juncture in the novel at which the satirical, naturalism-inflected adventure narrative gives way to the hallmarks of the utopian project. The beginning of the work, prior to this stone-game, ticks the boxes of the masculine adventure story,^[Christopher P. Wilson makes a similar observation as part of a different argument (182).] particularly through the parodic, masculine figure of Terry: “[Terry] used to make all kinds of a row because there was nothing left to explore now, only patchwork and filling in, he said.…The expedition was up…where the maps had to be made, savage dialects studied, and all manner of strange flora and fauna” (34). The men chart uncharted lands, discover an unknown society, are imprisoned after a failed struggle, and attempt a bold escape against the odds. “But,” as Van puts it, “this story is not about that expedition. That was only the merest starter for ours” (34). This struggle of the outnumbered heroes against the menacing collective would logically culminate in the acquisition of their military-industrial artifact, the ultimate empowerment of the wealthy and clever individual by technology. Instead, as described above, they find a game that punishes deviation from the cooperative enterprise, a lesson in precise, considered action, and a definitive quashing of the competitive impulse. With that denial of gratification, the narrative transitions into the type of discursive description of society that defines the utopian genre. It is then that the men, particularly Van, begin to see not only the garden itself as constitutive of society, but how that garden functions---and also to recognize it as the utopia it is meant to be.  What follows is the utopian account as systematic---self-consciously so---as that of Thomas More. 

Indeed, Thomas More reminds us that such a formal split is foundational to the utopian tradition. As Frederic Jameson shows in his essay “Morus: The Generic Window,” the presence of two generically distinct halves^[More specifically, it is the knowledge that the second half was written *first* that is the occasion of Jameson’s question; the tension persists regardless of such knowledge though insofar as it has become definitional of the genre.] demands that we choose which part of *Utopia* to foreground for interpretation. If we choose the first half, in which More criticizes and satirizes the historical present, “we will want to foreground satire and its generic structure.” If we choose the second, in which the structures and society of Utopia are outlined, “it will be travel narrative that sets the generic agenda” (23). Though its chapter breaks do not correspond to the formal break that I am arguing for here (in More, the division is marked), Gilman’s *Herland* is an idiosyncratic treatment of precisely this structure. In hers, the “travel narrative” that defines More’s second half is itself the target of satire in Gilman’s first part, at least in its adventurist qualities that parody the Spencerian social Darwinism and view of the dominant individual found in contemporaneous, masculinist literary naturalism. The second half, which has been called “essayistic” in the sense described by Adorno,^[In Katherine Fusco’s “Systems, Not Men: Producing People in *Herland*.] abandons the travel narrative for a narrative of inhabitation, education, and assimilation. This break is reiterated and reinforced by contrasting the idea of the garden with the idea of the wilderness, using collective control over built environments (both physical and social) in an attempt to resolve some of the tensions of literary naturalism. 



This view of *Herland* as a response to other works and literary movements is one peculiarly suited to studies of Gilman: she was notoriously skeptical of literature for its own sake, and the polemic seems in many ways to be her most comfortable mode. In this polemic, though, she has submerged a serious call for an ecological revision of economy and society, even if it is one that is not viable for basic reasons of physical reality or ethical problematics. In any case, reading *Herland* makes a strong case for a revitalized conversation about Gilman as, in addition to an important early feminist, as a pioneering environmentalist, socialist, and critic. [Conclusion needs work. Might fade out with excerpts from her biographical stuff]