Gilman's Garden: *Herland* and Literary Naturalism

In this essay, I will explore the ways that Charlotte Perkins Gilman's *Herland* uses the concept of the garden to present a revised social Darwinism, in doing so both critiquing and contributing to the literary naturalist movement. In the first section, I will demonstrate how Gilman invokes the garden as a model of a closed ecological and economic system, creating a conception of the city as an encompassing domicile and self-sustaining unit. I will place this discussion in the context of the contemporaneous garden city movement of Ebenezer Howard as well as existing scholarship on Gilman's complex relationship to the home. As I will show in the second section, Gilman's vision of a managed ecology with a determined *telos* also informs her use of evolutionary theory. She adheres to a form of social Darwinism, but she replaces competition with cooperation as the cause of development and the individual with the collective as the site of improvement. The expansionism and perpetual complexification of Herbert Spencer's social Darwinism, for example, is replaced with refinement and increased sustainability. In the final section, I will argue for a reading of the novel in terms of and as a response to literary naturalism, taking Gilman's garden as a powerful critique of the individualism and ruthlessness inherent in other naturalist works without abandoning the topoi, tensions, and formal characteristics basic to most critical definitions of the movement. Considering *Herland* as a naturalist work adds context to its social polemic, but it also challenges the movement's definition by including an acutely dissenting voice on the topics of urbanism, determinism, and environment.