---
title: Gilman’s Garden&#58; Ecological Economy, Coevolution, and Utopian Naturalism in *Herland*
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
profname: Austin Graham
coursename: Masters Thesis
date: April 21, 2014
fontsize: 12pt
---

In her utopian novel *Herland* (1915), Charlotte Perkins Gilman invites us to
consider “a land in a state of perfect cultivation, where even the forests
looked as if they were cared for; a land that looked like an enormous park,
only that it was even more evidently an enormous garden”; a land with “clean,
well-built roads,…attractive architecture,…[and] ordered beauty”; a land more
“petted” than any before seen, “even in Germany,” in which practically all of
the trees are “[f]ood-bearing” (42-4). It is an entire country that blends the
built and natural environments to provide for its people a perfect freedom from
scarcity (42-4). The soil has been improved and the wildlife managed with such
care that no farming or harvesting is necessary---the land *provides*, without
the coercion of laborious agricultural production. Nobody seems to direct the
maintenance of this environment, and yet it is maintained by the effortless and
seemingly automatic contributions of Herland’s people: some keep careful watch
for destructive elements of the ecology, others construct careful art objects
that embody a culture of environmental care, and still others run communal
eating houses that completely fulfill the need for food. This is a society that
has grown together with its environment in mutual nurturance, a garden in which
the human grows in tandem with other organisms, each producing naturally what
the other needs to survive. Herland’s forests are not the “rank” and “tangled”
vegetation of the world beyond (67): this land has evolved beyond the necessity
of competition and into a freedom attainable only through cooperation.

Though the most popular of her novels, *Herland* remains somewhat marginal
outside of Gilman scholarship. Critics often prefer the narrative richness and
psychological focus of “The Yellow Wallpaper” (1892), the story of a woman
whose domesticity, embodied in the design of the titular wallpaper, drives her
to madness. The plot of *Herland*, in contrast, is in many ways traditional
utopian fare in the vein of Thomas More, Edward Bellamy, and William Morris.
The three male protagonists, Vandyck (the narrator), Terry, and Jeff, discover
a country that has been lost to the rest of the world for two thousand years, a
civilization of only women who reproduce parthenogenetically: each woman
conceives asexually unless she wills herself not to. After a brief imprisonment
and an abortive escape attempt, the men are assimilated into the society of
Herland and set about learning its ways. It has a system of ecological
socialism that emphasizes the efficient use of resources and rewards social
duty over individual achievement, and is defined above all by communal
motherhood as a social paradigm. Many readers have focused on the feminist
themes of this utopia, and they are certainly dominant in every aspect. Beneath
this main line of argument, though, there is an equally serious set of premises
concerning the imbrication of economy and ecology, built environment with
natural environment, and human evolution with the evolution of the earth. These
less explored undercurrents will be the focus of this paper.

More specifically, I will take up Gilman’s subtle invitations to read the world
of *Herland* with a garden as its framing metaphor. Throughout much of her
life, Gilman kept a garden of her own---a “vegetable garden mind you!, not
merely flowers”---at one point as a means of subsistence in the lean years of
her later life, at another point referring to it as her “sanitarium” (*Selected
Letters* 180, 281, 284). The relevance of this subsistence garden to *Herland*
is clear: in all its appearances in the novel, the garden appears as a space
that is simultaneously built and natural, a source of food and material goods
that is neither agricultural nor industrial and yet is not entirely distinct
from either. Additionally, the garden is a public space whose maintenance and
ownership are shared by all members of society, and the communal construction
of environment that the metaphor implies is central to all aspects of life in
Herland. One passage, in which a Herlander describes realizing her place in the
community and with respect to the environment, is particularly revealing of the
way the garden organizes the economy and the Herlanders’ view of labor:

“It was a butterfly that made me a forester,” said Ellador. “I was about eleven
years old, and I found a big purple and green butterfly on a low flower. I
caught it, very carefully, by the closed wings, as I had been told to do, and
carried it to the nearest insect teacher---” (I [Vandyck] made a note there to
ask her what on earth an insect teacher was) “to ask her its name. She took it
from me with a little cry of delight. ‘Oh, you blessed child…. This is a female
of the obernut moth,’ she told me, ‘they are almost gone. We have been trying
to exterminate them for centuries. If you had not caught this one, it might
have laid eggs enough to raise worms enough to destroy thousands of our nut
trees---thousands of bushels of nuts,---and make years and years of trouble for
us.’…I grew a foot, it seemed to me, and determined then and there to be a
forester.” (123)

On the narrative level, this passage reverses the expectation of total,
unquestioned, and even sentimental conservation, revealing instead an ideology
of environmental management. The tender, careful handling of the frail creature
will ultimately culminate, we realize, in the creature’s death, the last stage
in a deliberate extinction. This reversal effectively replaces uncomplicated
reverence for the natural world with a commitment to transform the
“natural”into the most desirable possible system. Understanding that the
obernut moth limits the propagation of the obernut, and realizing that the
obernut is Herland’s “best food-nut,” they create a situation in which
nurturing the environment they have crafted will mean nurturing themselves
(123). 

It is also important to note what this system of ecological management reveals
about the nature of labor, professional identity, and economy in Herland. In
this passage, Ellador is telling the story of her professional
self-realization---the moment when she conceives of herself in terms of her
role in the economy---but it is also the moment at which she realizes her place
in the ecology. Considered in terms of labor, such a “forester” is a peculiar
entity: she is not quite an agricultural producer, and yet her actions
contribute to the sufficient supply of food. She is not exactly employed by the
state, and yet her function to the community is clear. Her duties are framed in
terms of maintaining the environment, and yet in doing so she is also
maintaining herself---both materially, by providing food for herself as well as
others, and psychologically, by coming into her identity. The ambiguity of this
form of labor (can taking care of oneself be considered *labor*?) is resolved
by a foundational but submerged concept in *Herland*, the idea of a *garden
economy*: a system in which the thing produced is environment, not commodity;
in which, as a result, production and consumption disappear as discrete
entities; and which culminates in the gradual subsumption of labor into being.

One result of this collapse of environmental production into self-sustenance is
that the perpetuation of society through procreation becomes an economic
activity. Similar to the economic consideration presented in her nonfiction
writings such as *Women and Economics* (1898), in *Herland* Gilman presents
motherhood as a fundamental contribution to the collective that is
depersonalized and subject to division of labor.^[This aspect of the novel has
been much discussed in Gilman scholarship, as has the understanding of
motherhood as an ecological and systemic process. See Alex Shishin’s “Gender
and Industry in Herland,” Katherine Fusco’s “Systems, Not Men: Producing People
in *Herland*,” and K. Graehme Hall’s “Mothers and Children: ‘Rising with the
Restless Tide’ in *Herland*.”] In this context, the magical, parthenogenetic
reproductive capacity of the Herlanders is an extension of the garden economy
that suggests a mutual reinforcement of human and environmental development .
Indeed, Gilman takes a semi-Lamarckian position that emphasizes the role of
environment in evolution---like Lamarck, she considers the possibility that
acquired traits can be passed on to other generations. Taking environment as
the main determining factor in evolution also brings the creation of culture
into the evolutionary equation: Gilman uses education, a fundamental part of
the Herland culture, as a way to guide the management of the physical
environment, depicting a society that, in determining its environment’s
development, simultaneously guides its *own* development. The resultant
coevolutionary system foregrounds the interaction of the human with the natural
world in its conception of a continued human evolution. By depicting this
process as a result of social reform and control of the built environment (a
process that I will discuss in more detail later), Gilman frames her work as
well as that of her contemporary feminist reformers as interventions in the
evolutionary process.

In what follows, I will argue that Charlotte Perkins Gilman uses the garden as
a framing device to depict a system in which management of environment replaces
the market cycle of production and consumption, collective sustenance becomes
the end-goal of the economy, and humanity as a culture and a species co-evolves
with its environment. In the first section, I will show that the ecological
balance of built and natural environments creates a garden economy in which
labor, subsumed into being, ceases to be an exploitative activity, and vitality
becomes the mechanism and end-goal of the economy. In the second section, I
will argue that this relationship to the environment leads to a coevolutionary
system in which biological determinism, environmental determinism, and
education all contribute to a growing-together of humanity with nature. This
process, as I will show, can be most effectively understood in its similarity
to the Marxian “metabolism” of town and country. ^[With this part of the
argument, I hope to question the general silence between Marxist criticism and
Gilman scholarship. Walter Benn Michaels’s reading of “The Yellow Wallpaper” in
*The Gold Standard and the Logic of Literary Naturalism* is an immediate and
notable exception to this silence.] I will conclude by suggesting that the
treatment of these topics in *Herland* constitutes a utopian naturalism, in
which the themes and tendencies common to many naturalist works are
simultaneously taken up and critiqued by the depiction of a utopian
collectivist society. In this view, Gilman’s garden can be taken as a rejoinder
to the social Darwinism commonly associated with the mainstream American
literary naturalism and, at the same time, can be considered as a dissenting
facet of that canon.

***

Before an analysis of *Herland*’s garden environment can take place, some
description is in order. As in many utopian works, the author herself provides
the basic description of the world through which she makes her arguments. Hers
is a particularly cartographical description, because the three male
protagonists view Herland from a biplane, hoping to get “the lay of the land”
before they descend (41). From above, they see that the land is confined to a
triangular “high-standing spur” rising out of the “dark green sea of crowding
forest” around it (41). The sense of obstruction is reinforced on the far end
by “white-crowned peaks in the distance, themselves probably
inaccessible”---topographical features that only reappear in the narrative as
symbols of inaccessibility.^[When Alima flees Terry, she finds refuge in the
mountains, after which point it is understood that she is unreachable (161).]
As for the land itself: “It appeared to be well forested about the edges, but
in the interior there were wide plains, and everywhere parklike meadows and
open places”; in addition, “closely cultivated gardens” mark the interior
plains (42, 47). Vandyck notes the presence of cities without giving a sense of
their number or spatial orientation, but there are indications later that
similar small cities are spread throughout the country.^[See, for example, the
men’s lecture circuit partway through the novel (109-11).] The relegation of
the forest to the edges of Herland is important both symbolically and
practically. Its marginality is maintained as part of its essential character,
with the forest as far from urban space as one is able to go, but it also
prevents the trees from impeding travel through the interior. This practical
function is underscored by the presence of “clean, well-built roads,” the
unhindered view from “the edge of the open country” through field glasses, and
the speed with which three Herlanders on foot are able to distance themselves
from the male intruders (42, 47). Open space allows infrastructural, visual,
and physical links between the disparate groups of Herlanders apparently
contained in clusters of urban space. This deliberate organization of the land
into forest, open space, and urban space is foregrounded from the beginning,
and it is partially this division, the strategic use and removal of
impediments, that gives Vandyck the sense that the land “looked like an
enormous park, only that it was even more evidently an enormous garden” (42).
The organization also subtly introduces the entirely managed character of the
country, and establishes from the beginning a teleological understanding of
space--- of a land that is constructed for a purpose, in contrast to actual
wilderness.

Nowhere is this contrast of *cultivated* natural space with actual wildness
more evident than within the forest itself, where it is underscored by the
voiced amazement of the three male outsiders. In Vandyck’s initial impressions,
he points out with astonishment that “even the forests looked as if they were
cared for” (42). Later, Terry says, “I never saw a forest so petted, even in
Germany. Look, there’s not a dead bough---the vines are
trained---actually!...[The trees are f]ood-bearing, practically all of them....
The rest splendid hard-wood. Call this a forest? It’s a truck farm!” (44). The
word “cultivated” is repeated many times with reference to every aspect of the
landscape, flora and fauna alike, as well as the tiny gardens that dot the open
plains---at one point the forests are referred to simply as “the cultivated
area” (66). The forested area is not the tangled thicket, the wilderness
embodied, as it is in the world beyond. Here, it is the breadbasket of the rest
of the country, as is born out by Terry’s comment that it is a “truck farm,”
another name for a market-garden. This somewhat obsolete term also indicates
produce grown for non-commercial purposes, and it is related to definitions of
“truck” as bartered (thus non-market) goods (“truck”). Cultivation here is
immediately associated with subsistence in the absence of the market, and the
*usefulness* of the forest is its defining characteristic. Later, these aspects
of the forest are shown to both arise from and resolve Herland’s situation as a
“little shut-in piece of land where one would have thought an ordinary people
would have been starved out long ago or reduced to an annual struggle for life”
(104). The interaction of cultivation and wildness has in some way lifted the
Herlanders out of simple necessity, making plenty and freedom from scarcity a
constitutive element of the wilderness.^[Li-Wen Chang also notes this peculiar
character of the wilderness, saying that “nature and culture nurture each
other” in the Gilman’s environment. Through a reading of Leo Marx’s *The
Machine in the Garden* (1964), she argues that Herland constitutes a “‘middle
landscape’…where machine meets landscape, where the two opposing forces,
technological and pastoral, contact and compromise which each other” (343). In
a similarly technological reading, Katherine Fusco argues in “Systems, Not Men:
Producing People in Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s *Herland*” that “Gilman
dissolves the distinction between biological and mechanical reproduction
through her insistence that the proper way to understand a person is as both
product and part of a system” (427).]

The Herland forest, though, despite its “pettedness,” is no system of
exploitative agricultural production, and the space retains its wildness; this
wildness deemphasizes consumption despite the obvious availability of every
necessary good. The peculiar coexistence of the managed and the natural is
revealed during the men’s escape attempt, when Vandyck says, “Mighty lucky it
was that we could live off the country as we did. Even that margin of forest
seemed rich in food-stuffs” (67). On one hand, the idea of living “off the
country” invokes an inapplicable paradigm of hunter-gatherer like woodsmanship,
a product of Vandyck’s own misunderstanding. But what it also underscores is
that the land itself has become a kind of pantry without ceasing to be an
exterior space. Consumption in Herland is rendered as an interaction with
environment and “the land,” but the possibility of “liv[ing] off” it does not
constitute an achievement as it might in a survivalist wilderness adventure.
Instead, the land provides. Interestingly, plentiful access to resources leaves
the act of consumption largely un-narrated here and throughout the novel.
Except for the passing reference to the “obernut” in Ellador’s tale of
professional identification, Gilman does not describe the presumably unique
products of this foreign ecosystem. The eliding, collective reference to
“food-stuffs” is paradigmatic of her references to food in general: it is never
more than a category, an acknowledge necessity. In Herland one seems to *find*
food without searching for it, eliminating in the same stroke the array of
choices that defines consumerism and the struggle to attain sustenance that
defines survivalism. Consumption in *Herland* is, in a sense, ambient.
Vandyck’s easy “liv[ing] off the country” sets the tone for all references to
consumption in *Herland*---the depiction of plenty without waste, of the
immediate satisfaction of wants by goods that are always already at hand,
recurs throughout.^[See also the resolution of the men’s nakedness by perfectly
fitting, perfectly functional, and deliberately anti-fashionable clothing when
they awake as prisoners (55)] 

The corresponding paradigm of production is more difficult to trace. Any
attempt to describe the industry of Herland leads one to ask: What do the
Herlanders actually produce?^[Alex Shishin also asks this question, with a
different but related answer: “If such an industrial base exists in Herland, we
do not see it, nor hear or smell it. The same pleasant condition---a pronounced
lack of industrial pollution and ugliness---is present in the two seminal
utopian novels which preceded Herland: Edward Bellamy's *Looking Backward*
(1888) and William Morris's *News from Nowhere* (1890). But while Bellamy and
Morris offer explanations for this, Gilman does not” (“Gender and Industry in
*Herland*” 101).] The only tenable answer is that they produce their
environment, and solely their environment. Elsewhere, when Vandyck learns more
about the cultivation that constitutes “foresting” as a profession, he
discovers that the process entails less a planting of produce than the creation
of a desirable environment entire. In some cases this has led to “the
deliberate replanting of an entire forest area with different kinds of
trees”---an unimaginably vast displacement that nevertheless results in a
functioning ecosystem, and one that, with respect to the needs of the Herland
people, has been improved (104). In many other cases, environmental improvement
runs still deeper, creating ecological balance in a system that includes the
built environment and urban space. For example, because they essentially
compost their entire waste material (and do not produce waste that cannot be
composted), “an increasingly valuable soil [is] built, instead of the
progressive impoverishment so often seen in the rest of the world” (105). The
development of the environment is allowed to proceed naturally, but the
conditions are set such that this natural development adheres to a desirable
course. The environment that determines this growth (the soil) is altered so
that development is both bolstered and guided by the combination of Herland’s
natural and built environments. As a result, the only necessary human
intervention is too incidental to be understood as labor---as is the case for
Ellador, the forester discussed in the introduction. In the case of the
production of soil, the main place of intervention is in the production of
human excrement, which is a necessary vital process. Both circumstances are
defined by systemic interventions that either leverage or strategically prevent
the natural activity of the ecosystem’s organisms: where the rapidly
industrializing society of 1915 America was defined by systems of production,
Gilman’s society opts for the production of systems.^[For more on systems as a
paradigm of production, personhood, and society in *Herland*, and more
specifically the relevance of Frederick Winslow Taylor’s *The Principles of
Scientific Management*, see Katherine Fusco’s “Systems, Not Men.”] 

The difference between these two modes of production frees Herlanders from
commodity production and the exploitative traps inherent therein. The way this
reduction of unnecessary labor comes about becomes especially clear when framed
by the theory of value in Karl Marx’s *Capital*, published slightly fewer than
fifty years before *Herland*. In Marx’s labor theory of value, the exchange
value of a commodity is defined by the cost necessary to reproduce the means of
production---which includes the sustenance of the laborers---plus the surplus
value, which derives from the unpaid labor that occurs after the laborers have
done enough to provide for their physical necessities.^[See chapters eight and
nine and the first section of chapter ten of *Capital* volume one (133-151).]
When the only thing produced is a communally held environment, though, the
workers’ aggregate labor does nothing more than reproduce the means of
production. This is more than to say that they only work as long as is
necessary for their own sustenance; rather, they create a situation that gives
them what they need without the necessity of labor beyond a constantly
diminishing minimum. Labor is required to create that situation, but the goal
of labor is always the reduction of further labor rather than the increase of
profitability. Past this point, the entire economy---which here, in the absence
of a market, consists only of the production of use values^[On use values and
labor, see John Bellamy Foster: “Marx [wrote] in his *Economic Manuscript of
1861-63* that ‘actual labour is the appropriation of nature for the
satisfaction of human needs….’ It followed that the actual activity of labor
was never independent of nature’s own wealth-creating potential, ‘since
material wealth, the world of use values, exclusively consists of natural
materials modified by labour’” (157). To the extent that labor does exist in
Herland, it appears to take this form exclusively, except that the modification
takes as its product ecological systems rather than commodities.]---is subsumed
by the ecology, with the exception of minor ecological interventions like
Ellador’s encounter with the obernut.  

Walter Benn Michaels, in his reading of “The Yellow Wallpaper,” describes a
system that is in many ways a market version of the Herland garden economy;
many of the problems he points out are resolved in *Herland* by the removal of
the market from Herland entirely. Michaels argues that in “The Yellow
Wallpaper,” published in 1892, the woman’s body becomes a site “simultaneously
of production and consumption…rewritten as the utopian body of the market
economy” in which “products not only exist to be consumed, but coming into
existence they already are consumed.” The simultaneous buying and selling,
producing and consuming of the self is conditional to *owning* that self,
making “exchange…the condition of [one’s] existence.” This “triumphant
omnipresence of market relations” is, for Michaels, the cause of the
character’s nervous breakdown: the narrator’s “marking” the yellow wallpaper
that is the object of her constant, compulsive meditation and simultaneously
being “marked” by it in turn both indicates the logic of the market economy and
is the main feature of the narrator’s madness (*The Gold Standard* 13). The
system depicted in *Herland* shares this simultaneity and omnipresence of
production and consumption---but it exists without market relations and without
breakdown. Framing the built environment with the managed natural environment
turns the conditions of a collapse into the conditions of an ideal society,
replacing market forces with ecological balance. Money, exchange, and the
marketplace are entirely absent from the narrative: unlike almost every other
conspicuous absence, each of which is foregrounded by discussion between the
outsiders and Herlanders, money never comes up in Herland. ^[Prior to their
foray money is mentioned indirectly, but only as a feature of the world beyond
Herland: Terry’s family wealth bankrolls the expedition and provides the
biplane (33).] Without a market economy in which the product is always “already
consumed,” goods are always already produced *and* consumed: consumption exists
in complex interrelation with production as part of the ecology. 

The reproduction of one’s own labor through self-sustenance, as the means by
which this simultaneous production and consumption occurs, is sufficient
contribution to the Herland ecology---and as such, it is a Herlander’s only
economic obligation. Ecology is a mutuality of being, an involuntary
interrelation of organisms that requires of them only that they survive:
therefore, when ecology replaces market relations, living is the only “socially
necessary” labor. With *Herland*, Gilman uses the production of environment,
which occurs almost entirely as a concomitant of living, to envision an
assimilation of the vital processes into the ecology-driven economy; this frees
the vital processes from the reliance on an external economy that Michaels
describes, stabilizing it against disruption from without. Environmental
production provides Herlanders with freedom from market exploitation and makes
the welfare of the individual subject essential to the health of the system
that contains it.

To produce only environment and to live instead of work: these concepts in many
ways sound like the kind of domesticity that Gilman herself abhorred and spent
much of her career attempting to reform. The terms of her ecological economy
borrow from and contribute to the terms of domesticity at the turn of the
twentieth century. Indeed, it is precisely this reappropriation of housework
into the sphere of the economy that defines Gilman’s rejoinder to existing
domesticity, even though it makes the novel difficult to accept as a useful
contribution to feminism. To be understood, Gilman’s economic paradigm of
environmental production has finally to be considered alongside her lifelong
pursuit of domestic reform.

Throughout Gilman’s career, she sharply criticized the relegation of women to
the domestic sphere and the exploitation inherent in domestic labor;^[See
especially *Women and Economics*, *The Home: Its Work and Influence*, and “The
Waste of Private Housekeeping.” For the wider context of domestic reform in
Gilman’s work and in the context of the early twentieth century, see Yvonne
Gaudelieus’s “Kitchenless Houses and Homes: Charlotte Perkins Gilman and the
Reform of Architectural Space,” Polly Wynn Allen’s *Building Domestic Liberty*,
and Dolores Hayden’s “Two Utopian Feministsand Their Campaigns for Kitchenless
Houses.”] among the most programmatic of the results was her part in the
campaign for the kitchenless household. In *Women and Economics*, she argues
that “change in the economic position of woman from dependence to independence
must bring with it a rearrangement of these home interests and industries”
(224). Thus, she lays out a vision of “apartments…without kitchens” except
those “belonging to the house from which meals could be served to the families
in their rooms or in a common dining-room,” hoping thereby to liberate the
“hundreds of thousands of women in New York City alone who are wage-earners,
and who also have families” (242-3).^[See also Allen’s *Building Domestic
Liberty*: “By the middle of the nineteenth century, roughly one-third of
American women entered the paid labor force on a temporary basis, usually until
they married. Only the poorest women---immigrants, widows, and free
blacks---engaged in a lifelong effort to make ends meet financially by working
outside of their homes” (12).] In a strikingly similar passage in *Herland*,
Van says, “For food we either went to any convenient eating-house, ordered a
meal brought in, or took it with us to the woods, always and equally good”
(144). The relevance of this domestic reform advocacy to the utopian vision of
Herland is unsurprising, but what *Herland* adds to the conversation is a
consideration of these communal spaces as part of the larger, self-sustaining
system. The communal kitchens are what nourish and revitalize the soil that in
turn produces the material that those kitchens and their dependents need to
survive. The stated goal of Gilman’s domestic reform---of incorporating
domestic labor into the sphere of the economy by opening it to division of
labor^[See Chang, especially 323-4; and Fusco 420-1.]---becomes in *Herland* an
incorporation of domestic labor into ecological management. In this ecological
garden economy, environmental production *is* that economized version of
domesticity.

Indeed, since the closed ecological system that defines Herland eliminates the
distinction between interior and exterior space, the garden model of society
delineates a vision of a productive home, the spatial equivalent of
living-as-labor. The complicated lines of home and world are born out by a
conversation between Terry, the mouthpiece of domestic imprisonment, and Jeff,
the character who eventually becomes a male Herlander and appears to speak the
Herland party line: 

“*Home!*” [Terry] sneered. “There isn’t a home in the whole pitiful place.”

“There isn’t anything else, and you know it,” Jeff retorted hotly. (121)

In Jeff’s explanation, “home” means so much that it has, to Terry, effectively
become meaningless. Home is defined in contradistinction to economic labor by
the masculinist Terry, and the conversation can be taken as Gilman’s narrative
staging of the housework-as-labor question. If foresting is both the base of
the Herland economy and part of making dinner, can it be called housework? If
the kitchen and pantry circumscribe the world, is everything housework? The
rhetorical question that Gilman repeatedly included in lectures to women’s
clubs becomes paramount: “Shall the home be our world? or the world our home?”
(qtd. in Allen 18). The means of eliminating this distinction in *Herland*, in
the context of what has been shown above, is its inclusion in a system larger
than itself. The imprisonment implicit in the first of Gilman’s options---“the
home be[ing] our world”---is based on the exclusion of that space from the
systems beyond it. But taking the “world [as] our home” implies the application
of a domestic paradigm of labor to a larger system.^[It is in this sense, as
Jennifer Fleissner argues, that the expanded home of *Herland* offers a kind of
solution to the “naturalist” domesticity-as-degeneration of “The Yellow
Wallpaper,” and the garden of *Herland* fixes the image of the gated garden of
the earlier short story’s setting (Fleissner 87, 95). The impossible labor of
ordering that leads to the “Wallpaper” narrator’s breakdown, she points out,
becomes an effective ordering of the *Herland* garden. This shift to
effectiveness can be seen, I am suggesting, as a product of domestic labor’s
inclusion in the at once ecological and economic system.] The simultaneity of
interior and exterior space also requires the interrelation of the systems that
define both. The exterior struggle of *nomia* and *logia*, of mastery and the
non-participation implied in study, is resolved by a paradigm of productive
domesticity only if the walls of the home are allowed to encompass the world,
thereby bringing that world under the sway of its laws. Put another way,
*Herland*’s garden system can be seen as a way of making economy, ecology, and
domesticity resolve each other.

***

What, then, is the place of the human in the environment in *Herland*---that of
the producer or the product? And how does this view of the garden come to bear
on the vision of evolution presented in *Herland* and elsewhere in Gilman’s
writing? In beginning to answer these questions---and in her occasionally
essayistic prose, she does so unusually directly---Gilman reveals her
complicated relationship to evolutionary theory and the environmental factors
that influence it. She replicates her own ambivalence with respect to some of
the major evolutionary arguments of the nineteenth century in an exchange
between Terry and the Herlander Zava: when Terry refers to August Weissmann’s
refutation^[See Beth Sutton-Ramsbeck’s note on on the passage in *Herland and
Related Writings* (103 note 1).] of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, saying that
“acquired traits are not transmittable,” Zava and Terry respond:

“If that is so, then our improvement must be due either to mutation, or solely
to education,” she gravely pursued. “We certainly have improved. It may be that
all these higher qualities were latent in the original mother; that careful
education is bringing them out; and that our personal differences depend on
slight variations in prenatal condition.”

“I think it is more in your accumulated culture,” Jeff suggested. “And in the
amazing psychic growth you have made.” (103)

At stake here are the comparative roles of genetics and culture to evolutionary
development. The first sentence can be seen as weighing Darwinism against
Lamarckism, but no clear conclusion is reached. Zava also presents another
possibility, however, which is a unique synthesis of biological and
environmental determinism in which everyone descended from the original
mother---which to Herlanders means the known world---contains dormant
unrealized powers that only careful nurture can bring out. In this possibility,
prenatal *conditions* rather than genetic makeup determine the distinctions
between individuals. This view places emphasis on communal self-improvement in
tandem with the inherent worth of the individual. Put another way, it
simultaneously posits an essential and predetermined character and a gradual
development of that character, a course limited by both genetic makeup and
environment while being guaranteed by neither. A final element is added to the
discussion by Jeff’s suggestion, which favors a “culture” and communal “psychic
growth” that are, it later becomes clear, instilled by the system of education.
This discussion reveals a complex interrelation of three elements in Gilman’s
version of evolution: genetic inheritance, environmental influence, and
education. Here and throughout the novel, none of these elements becomes
central enough to be seen as mechanically deterministic; the exploration of
each must necessarily take place in terms of its interaction with the others.

Gilman’s take on the first element, the genetic side of guided evolution, is
the one that has been the most (and most polemically) discussed in Gilman
scholarship. As is evident in the idea of an “original mother” from whom the
Herlanders have inherited their “higher qualities,” this genetic concept of
evolution, when taken in the context of the garden’s managed development, leads
quickly to a problematic relationship to eugenics.^[The topic of eugenics,
along with the question of race in Gilman more generally, has been a major and
controversial topic of Gilman scholarship. The initiating essay in this strand
of criticism is Susan S. Lanser’s 1989 essay “Feminist Criticism, ‘The Yellow
Wallpaper,’ and the Politics of Color in America,” which Jennifer L. Fleissner
says has since become “hegemonic” (Fleissner 95). Cynthia J. Davis provides a
rigorous historical and biographical context to eugenics in *Herland* in her
essay on Gilman and Lester F. Ward, “His and Herland.” In a somewhat different
vein, Fleissner urges a re-historicization of the eugenic conversation in terms
of middle-class women, nineteenth-century feminism, and the rise of a
“therapeutic culture” as it relates to race in America (92-5).] These
implications would be hashed out by Gilman herself fifteen years after
*Herland*, in an unpublished (perhaps unpublishable) article called “Gardening
and the Baser Passions.” Though evidently an attempt at “humor”---or so it is
described in a letter from Charlotte Barbour, one of Gilman’s editors at
Putnam, explaining that the essay would not be accepted by horticulture
journals (Barbour)---in such a grim context the effect is anything but. In
sharp contrast to a sentimental view of the garden parodied early in the
article, Gilman says that the main work of the gardener is not to plow, plant,
or harvest---rather, “his main business, his longdrawn incessant effort, is to
kill.” From this premise the rest of the essay describes the many and various
ways to kill as well as the necessity to “kill without ceasing” if the
gardener’s “plants are to live,” and finally dissolving into a litany of the
many organisms detrimental to the gardener’s efforts. Although, as Cynthia J.
Davis points out, it would be incorrect to suggest that none of the
reprehensible and often racist views that defined her conservative old age had
developed when she was writing *Herland*, it seems that not until “her later
years” did “Gilman [become] a decided proponent of eugenics” in the way she is
if her essay on gardening is to be taken as extending to the garden of her
society (“His and Herland” 82). Indeed, a shift in the way she considers the
*literal* garden is documented in her correspondence well after the time of
*Herland*. In a letter to Alice Park on June 29th, 1928, some two years before
the rejection of the “Gardening” essay and thirteen years after *Herland*,
Gilman writes: 

All May the planning and planting, all June the weed-weed-Weeding. I’ve changed
my mind about the word “fighting” as applied to weed. If the desire to kill and
desperate efforts thereto, against the ceaseless pressure of an en-enemy
[*sic*], a million-headed enemy which rises up like Anteus is not a fight, what
is it? (*Selected Letters* 272)

Her acceptance of the violent paradigm for the gardener in 1928 indicates that
her position prior to that point was a gentler (if willfully myopic) view of
managed growth---perhaps best defined by a metaphor of “planting” rather than
“weeding.” Though by no means a resolution to the novel’s eugenics problem (it
merely shifts to a different type of eugenics), this emphasis on traits that
are encouraged over those that are discouraged allows Gilman to avoid the overt
brutality that she would later embrace regarding literal gardening.
Accordingly, the role of the human as simultaneous producer and product of the
environment is more complicated as it appears in *Herland* than this later
depiction of the gardener’s task.

The model of evolutionary guidance that Gilman emphasizes in her novel is
instead focused on the  *environmental* management described above, the second
determinant in her tripartite system of evolution. The effects of this process
thus extend beyond the purely social change of the various domestic reform
movements and into the biological realm, and guidance of human development
occurs at one level of remove. Here the vision of an enriched soil becomes the
operative metaphor, above either “planting” or “weeding,” in that the
environment that encourages and guides growth is the only thing directly
interfered with---*not* the organism itself. This view of the environment’s
relationship to biological development comes largely from the influence of
Lester F. Ward, a contemporary of Gilman’s who was a botanist, paleontologist,
and sociologist, and whom she considered one of the most important thinkers of
her time. This approval was in large part because of his gynaecocentric view of
evolution, which afforded a primacy to women very much in line with Gilman’s
own thinking. Cynthia J. Davis has conclusively demonstrated the influence of
Ward on Gilman’s writing in general and *Herland* in particular, even arguing
that the novel can be seen as a narrative extrapolation from Ward’s theories
and an extension of his gynaecocentric theory. Most important in terms of
Gilman’s relationship to environment is Ward’s Lamarckian view of evolution:
because Lamarck proposed the inheritance of acquired traits across generations,
environmental influence becomes central to that process to the extent that it
determines which traits an organism acquires.^[The famous example of the
giraffe stretching its neck for food is particularly illustrative of this
point: according to Lamarck, the giraffe’s neck is long because of generations
of stretching to find the best leaves (Lamarck 122).] As Davis points out,
Gilman goes even further than Ward (and Lamarck) with her emphasis on the role
of environment in human evolution: environment is Gilman’s “answer” to “why
women had not flourished,” Davis says, and the limits imposed by environmental
factors are “crucial to Gilman’s brand of determinism” (“His and Herland” 76).
It is in considering the relationship of biological and environmental
determinism that one major effect of parthenogenetic reproduction in *Herland*
becomes clear: it eliminates the variable of biological differentiation by
reproductive selection, as if she is isolating the variable of environment to
better argue for its effect on evolutionary development. Purely biological
determinism is ruled out as an explanation for evolution except to the extent
that biological difference is itself determined by environment.

The unique relationship of human and environment that appears in *Herland* is
brought into focus by a contemporaneous article that Gilman published in
*Circle Magazine* in 1908, entitled “Modern Beatitudes---The Newness of the
Earth.” Here she suggests that the earth and the human species are both mere
children, as yet relatively undeveloped but constantly growing into balance
with one another. The evolution of the human race is framed here as a gradual
accretion of understanding as to the effects of human activity on the
earth---or an understanding of what we now would call the
anthropocene---coupled with a mass-adaptation based on that understanding.
After describing the gradual exhaustion of the earth’s resources by “our
present methods,” Gilman reassures us that the process will not continue to its
catastrophic conclusion, for we 

are waking up in good earnest these days; ceasing to be a baby race, a set of
ignorant, selfish, short-sighted infants, madly quarreling with one another
over the fruits most easily gathered. We are young yet, but no longer mere
children; young with the splendid hope and courage of youth, but not with the
weakness and irresponsibility of infancy.…All we have to do is to apply
ourselves to study the conditions of life on earth, and learn to meet them.

Humanity is saved, in this account, by its inevitable development into a wiser,
gentler race. Progress in this vision is not Herbert Spencer’s steady march
from simplicity to complexity or the continued expansion of the race to the
edges of the earth. It is instead a renunciation of wastefulness and
destructive behavior, which is to be replaced by the more careful management of
the natural environment. “There is absolutely nothing prevent us,” she
continues in unmistakable anticipation of *Herland*, “from reforesting our
hills, checking our floods, preserving our soils, maintaining the balance of
nature plus the art and skill and learning of mankind.” The paradigm of the
human struggling against the natural world is replaced by the simultaneous
development of both realms. By framing this development in terms of the growth
of the race, she implies a vision of *coevolution* defined by an increase in
balance, not an opposition to be resolved by conflict: refinement replaces
dominance and expansion.

This system of non-competitive coevolution is at the foundation of Gilman’s
garden society, and it is part of a larger sociological and scientific
trajectory beginning in the nineteenth century. Though she was not influenced
by Marx---she was vocal about her distaste for Marx and Marxism, perhaps not
least because of the depiction of women in his work^[See for example Denise D.
Knight’s biography of Gilman: “With other socialists of her background and
inclinations, Charlotte distrusted Marx and preferred to rely on the
intellectual labors of a native-born intelligentsia that included herself.…For
the most part, she sought her desired economic transformations within the
capitalist system even while criticizing that system for its intrinsically
patriarchal attitudes and practices” (197). Gilman herself provides additional
detail in her autobiography, *The Living of Charlotte Perkins Gilman*, saying,
“My socialism was of the early humanitarian kind, based on the first exponents,
French and English, with the American enthusiasm of Bellamy. The narrow and
rigid ‘economic determinism’ of Marx, with its ‘class consciousness’ and ‘class
struggle’ I never accepted, nor the political methods pursued by Marxians”
(131). Although Gilman’s own distaste for Marxism has kept him out of much
Gilman scholarship, the similarity of the concept of the “metabolism” discussed
below is extremely useful comparatively, both in bringing out the specifics and
implications of Gilman’s own ecology and placing her in the larger intellectual
context of her time (even the parts of that context that she herself might not
place herself in).]---his concept of the “metabolism” between humanity and
nature nevertheless bears strong resemblance to the coevolutionary paradigm in
*Herland*. Marx’s social metabolism (*Stoffwechsel*) is at the center of John
Bellamy Foster’s book *Marx’s Ecology*, in which he demonstrates the influence
of a materialist conception of the natural world on Marx’s thinking, and rebuts
claims that Marx is an anti-ecological proponent of industrial development at
the expense of the natural world. The metabolism of human and nature
constitutes a set of “evolving material relations” in which the human’s
simultaneous dependence on and alteration of its environment determine the
circular, material exchange between them (Foster 11, 155-60). Labor becomes, in
Marx’s view, 

a process between man and nature…by which man, through his own actions,
mediates, regulates and controls the metabolism between himself and
nature.…Through this movement [of the laboring body] he acts upon external
nature and changes it, and in this way he simultaneously changes his own
nature. (qtd. in Foster 157)

For labor to be an effective mediation of the system, though, it must be
“actual labor,” which produces only the material wealth of use-values (157). In
other words, it has to be a system like Herland’s that eschews the market
entirely. The material interchange that defines this concept derives in large
part from the rise of “energetics” in the physical sciences in the 1840s and
1850s, leading to a particular emphasis in Marx’s metabolic system on the
possible enrichment and degradation of soil found in the work of James Anderson
and Justus von Liebig (Foster 144-9, 161). Because the metabolism depends on
the energetics of soil, the separation of town and country causes a “rift” that
leads to the gradual despoliation of the environment (141-5). Unregulated
production and disharmony between the built and natural environments, two of
the concepts most heavily revised in Gilman’s system of coevolution, are the
factors that Marx identifies as disruptors of the metabolism. Considering this
metabolic system in relation to *Herland* helps contextualize the relationship
of Gilman’s evolutionary system to the garden environment (in which the built
and natural are imbricated) and the consequent reformation of labor.
Environmental management, achieved through a reversion to the “actual labor”
that produces only use-value, is also a means of guiding the complex material
interchange essential to the coevolution of the Herlanders and Herland.

The final element of Gilman’s evolutionary system, education, is the means by
which her coevolutionary system is developed and maintain across generations,
allowing individual social and cultural adaptations to environment to accrue
over time.^[For a broader view of gilman’s interest in education reform, see
Deborah M. De Simone’s “Charlotte Perkins Gilman and Educational Reform.”] The
Herlanders model and reinforce the dialectic with environment through a ludic,
ambient system of education. When asked about their schools, the Herlander
Somel says, “With the babies…we first provide an environment which feeds the
mind without tiring it…. But as early as possible…we provide choices, simple
choices, with very obvious causes and consequences” (128). The system of
education graduates from an accretion of environmental understanding to the
gradual realization that human action affects that environment, as she
describes in “Modern Beatitudes.” Moreover, the second stage of education is
achieved through *games* that “develop the faculties [they] wish to encourage.”
Games are shown to be foundations of pedagogy---and, thus, social
determinants---in the incident near the beginning of the novel in which the
men’s escape attempt is interrupted by an invitation to play. Three Herlanders
set up a pile of stones with a yellow nut on top, and invite the men to throw
stones at the pile. They fail miserably until “Jeff succeed[s] in bringing the
whole structure to the ground. It took me [Van] still longer, and Terry, to his
intense annoyance, came third.” Experience of the pedagogic built environment
is followed by swift instruction and the presentation of an alternative method:

Then Celis set up the little tripod again, and looked back at us, knocking it
down, pointing at it, and shaking her short curls severely. “No,” [Celis] said.
“Bad---wrong!”…Then she set it up once more, put the fat nut on top, and
returned to the others; and there those aggravating girls sat and took turns
throwing little stones at that thing, while one stayed by as a setter-up; and
they just popped that nut off, two times out of three, without upsetting the
sticks. (69)

The contrast between the two performances is severalfold. The men’s idea of
victory, for which they are reprimanded, destroys the entire tower; the women
strike only what they mean to, with minimal disruption to the larger structure.
The men compete against each other and against the women, sulking when they
lose and becoming divided; the women cooperate for the most efficient group
performance, systematizing the resetting of the structure and taking turns, and
their performance is described not according to the relative success of the
members but according to their aggregate success rate. In essence, the
difference between the two types of competition is the difference between
boxing and a boat race: success of the individual in the men’s group leads to
the failure of the rest of the group, while the success of a single Herlander
contributes to communal benefit. In both the relationship to the external and
the interrelationship of the internal, the competitive tendencies of the
men---which destroy the external elements of the system and waste time and
energy---are contrasted with the precise and cooperative systems of the women,
which culminate in a system of cyclical and effortless play. This basic
structure is described as part of the Herland school system; that school
system, as seen in the “forester” passage discussed in the introduction,
becomes at the higher levels a system of ecological instruction. (Ellador’s
interactions with insects are guided by a “bug teacher,” and this guidance
leads her to forestry.) Education in Herland discourages tendencies like
competition, which disrupt the managed ecology of the garden, while it
reinforces the gardener’s mentality of cyclical action and cooperative
development. Social evolution brings the development of society into line with
the development of the environment, managing the material interchange of human
and nature.

Coevolution is the foundation of Gilman’s garden---a “vegetable garden mind
you!, not merely flowers”: it allows identity of sustenance with the sustained,
simultaneity of the built and the natural, and cyclical reproduction in tandem
with evolutionary progress. The three elements of Gilman’s evolutionary
paradigm, genetics, environment, and education, work in a mutually reinforcing
system. Education instills the values of environmental management in which the
self is included, causing the creation and maintenance of an environment that
Gilman believes is the determinant of genetic variation and physical
transmutation. The principles of the sustaining garden finally bring social and
physical evolution into harmony. 

The question remains of how to approach a system of evolution that is marred
from one side by ethical problems and from the other by retrospective
scientific inaccuracy.^[Nothing based on Lamarckism can be taken seriously as
scientific fact, and it is telling that Lester F. Ward’s neo-Lamarckist
objections to Darwinism often seem based less on scientific dispute than on
fear of how its conclusions could be misused---a valid concern, but bad
science.] To begin on an ethical (and negative) level, this tripartite system
does not enable us to dismiss the problematics of race and eugenics in
*Herland*, but they may complicate the understanding of the system in the same
way that understanding Gilman’s reliance of Lester F. Ward does; recognizing
such connections allows us to better place Gilman in an historicizing context,
even if it does not (and should not) assist in her uncomplicated apotheosis as
a feminist icon. This speculative evolutionary system does come into useful
focus, however, when we consider it in terms of the utopian function of the
novel. If we provisionally take utopian fiction as a speculative fulfillment of
problems deriving from the authorial present---a process sympathetic to
Frederic Jameson’s concept of aesthetic resolutions to real problems, though
perhaps not identical with it^[See “On Interpretation” in Jameson’s *The
Political Unconscious*]---the usefulness of Gilman’s evolutionary narrative
becomes more conceivable. The next, concluding section will bring the issues of
labor and evolution discussed above to bear on *Herland*\’s utopian function
with regard to its historical and literary context.

***

The literary context and thematic content of *Herland* invite a reading of it
in terms of American literary naturalism, and indeed Gilman features as an
occasional figure in (especially contemporary) criticism on naturalism. The
difficulty of considering the novel in these terms, however, comes from the
notoriously vexed term “naturalism” itself. The only obvious consensus in
contemporary criticism of the movement is a rejection of a straw-man
descriptions of it in which individual agency is seen as always subjugated to
an uncomplicated determinism. Beyond this, any foray into naturalism seems to
come with either a radical reworking of the category or, as in the case of
Walter Benn Michaels in *The Gold Standard and the Logic of Literary
Naturalism*, an explicit desire to “avoid that debate entirely” (26). But the
stable threads that emerge as topics of conversation (if not arguments within
those topics) are distinct enough to admit the category as evidence and
consider the ways that Gilman is wading into these intellectual and artistic
streams. The most commented-upon of these topics is the relationship of
individual agency to deterministic forces, which the most compelling
discussions take as occasions in which naturalist novelists complicate the
rendering of the agentive self, not as the means by which that self is reduced
or made irrelevant. Lee Clark Mitchell in *Determined Fictions*, for example,
includes in his naturalist canon works that depict the conflict between the
character’s own self-conception as an “autonomous, integrated, freely willing
agent” and the countervailing narrative strategies that prove that conception
to be false; agency becomes largely psychological, while determinism becomes a
narrative, rather than an ontological, premise (xv). Donald Pizer is perhaps
the most optimistic voice on the topic of determinism, seeing in the resistance
to “amoral” deterministic forces a revitalization of “man’s sense of his own
dignity and importance” (11). Jennifer L. Fleissner’s *Women, Compulsion,
Modernity* resolves this tension in part with the concept of *compulsion*, in
which individual agency and “rationalizing ‘forces’ appear as more deeply
intertwined,” nature becomes an important actor in social life, and compulsive
ordering rituals arise as a mediation between the free and determined versions
of the self (9-10). In addition to the determination question, the relevance of
natural law and scientific knowledge to social, political, and economic life is
paramount to most definitions of naturalism, with Mark Seltzer notably arguing
in *Bodies and Machines* that the naturalist novel unites industrial production
with biological reproduction, and that it also responds to the realist premise
of linear narrative continuity by “map[ping] in high relief…the evolutionary
dynamics” of that continuity (43). A third trend of scholarship on naturalism
is to point out the archetypal plot of a character’s “degeneration” into a
figure truly determined by base desires, a trope associated especially with
Frank Norris’s *Vandover the Brute*.^[See for example Seltzer, 36-7.] Each of
these three topics is evident as a theme in *Herland*: a combination of
environmental, biological, and social determinism undergirds her depiction of
coevolutionary praxis; the imbrication of nature and culture has been discussed
at length above; and the possibility of degeneration into a “brute” dominated
by masculine urges is implicit in the immediate imprisonment of the male
intruders and the defensive stance assumed by the Herlanders.

It is primarily by building on Jennifer Fleissner’s reading of *Herland* in
*Women, Compulsion, Modernity*, however, that my own discussion can come to
bear on the question of literary naturalism. Fleissner’s 2004 intervention into
the study of naturalism has been acknowledged by many reviewers as a major
shift in the terms of the critical conversation, with Hildegard Hoeller,
reviewing the book for *American Literature*, calling it “an altogether new
view of naturalist writing” that leaves our view of the movement “usefully
expanded” (188). By shifting the focus of naturalism to the changing role of
women in the 1890s and the early 20th century, Fleissner reveals the repetitive
motion of compulsion that undergirds, as Rita Felski puts it, “women’s
problematic relationship to historical time” (282). Considering some of the
garden-like aspects of *Herland* in relation to the garden that surrounds the
house of “The Yellow Wallpaper,” which she calls as a “liminal space, neither
home nor wilderness” that “solves the problem of the too-natural ‘outside’ and
the too-cultural ‘inside,’” Fleissner argues that *Herland* should be seen as
“a ‘realist’ response on Gilman’s part to the troubling ‘naturalist’ vision of
the attempt at order manifested in her own earlier story” (95). In this
reading, the obsessional need to order that is so crippling (because its
realization is impossible) in “The Yellow Wallpaper” becomes the foundation of
Gilman’s imagined community, and compulsive domesticity drives “the utopian
social vision that would render the earlier story an obsolete relic” (87-95).
In the context of her larger argument, *Herland* is a feminist alternative to
the literary “West Cure”^[A pun on the “rest cure,” which Gilman was herself
prescribed and which figures in “The Yellow Wallpaper.”] that she takes as a
defining feature of masculine naturalism; in “The Great Indoors” of this
feminine West Cure, domesticity is supposed to perform for women the
therapeutic rehabilitation that young men were alleged to get from “going West”
and contending with the elements, freeing themselves from the teacups and
Victorian parlors of realist fiction (75-98). 

The extent to which domesticity can be taken as a “realist” fix for the
“naturalist” problems of “The Yellow Wallpaper” relies on these definitions of
naturalism and realism.^[For another take on Gilman’s response to naturalism in
her essays from *The Forerunner*, see Christopher P. Wilson’s “Charlotte
Perkins Gilman's Steady Burghers: The Terrain of Herland.”] But the garden of
*Herland* as I have described it here can be seen as an attempt to resolve more
aspects of naturalism^[Such attempts to “resolve” other literary paradigms are
not unprecedented in Gilman’s body of work and its criticism. See Jennifer S.
Tuttle’s “Gilman’s *The Crux* and Owen Wister’s *The Virginian*:
Intertextuality and ‘Woman’s Manifest Destiny’” for another reading of Gilman
responding to masculinist literary production.] than the problems that arise
from the domesticity embodied in the imprisoning leisure garden of “The Yellow
Wallpaper”---though resolving these is certainly much of *Herland*’s project.
The complex interrelation of economy, ecology, domesticity, and evolutionary
theory presents a wider rejoinder, not only to the gated garden of Gilman’s own
earlier “naturalism,” but also to the “rank” and “tangled” vegetation of the
wilderness that stands in for a naturalist view of nature defined by
“Darwinist” competition, non-productivity, and despair. The first things that
Vandyck and the other intruders learn, the condition of their understanding the
Herland garden, is the anti-competitive lesson of the stone-throwing game; the
expansive view of cooperative growth among humans and other organisms, which
defines the economy and ecology of Gilman’s garden, reforms the men who
represent something very external to the circuit between *Herland* and “The
Yellow Wallpaper,” something that extends the argument about domesticity beyond
its initial scope. Widening the focus of Gilman’s response beyond the domestic
in this way requires an addition to the description of *Herland* as “realist”
in Fleissner’s sense. In accepting many of the topics common to the naturalist
novel and revising them with a vision of what happens under certain conditions
of cooperation, Gilman invents a kind of utopian naturalism.^[The term “utopian
naturalism” also allows us to consider *Herland* as a response to naturalism
without losing the rich contextualization of the novel within the utopian
generic tradition. Gilman herself has been very explicit about her interest
especially in Bellamy’s *Looking Backward*, and considering the work in generic
terms is a useful means of approaching the novel. It contextualizes, for
example, the satirical take on the present simultaneous with a programmatic
projection of the future, a feature Frederic Jameson (reading Ernst Bloch)
identifies with Thomas More’s *Utopia* in “Morus: The Generic Window”. The
definitive work on Gilman’s relationship to the idea of utopia and its
corresponding literature is Carol Farley Kessler’s *Charlotte Perkins Gilman:
Her Progress Toward Utopia with Selected Writings*.] This utopian naturalism
accepts many of the premises associated with naturalist writing---some measure
of determinism, the relevance of natural law and scientific theory to social
life, and the need to guard against degeneration---while resolving by way of
the utopian premise those aspects of it to which she objects and which have
given naturalism its reputation for pessimism. These resolutions occur
primarily through the shift in focus from the individual will to the will of
the collective---a shift that is both a hallmark much utopian fiction and a
constitutive feature of the garden ideology. 

In this expanded sense of Gilman’s utopian rejoinder, we can see Gilman’s
garden as a way of opposing the simplistic determinism and social Darwinism so
often attributed to naturalist fiction, all the while marshaling an altered
version of these concepts to delineate a non-exploitative system of labor that
resists, even counteracts, the despoliation of the environment. The battle
waged on a fictional front uniquely concerned, by some definitions, with
reflecting reality, is for Gilman a way of addressing the reality that actually
is---and, in her case, that should be. The usefulness of this utopia, then, is
at least in part as an argument for the centrality of environment, as both a
heuristic and a material reality, in pursuing a certain brand of socialism. In
this sense it can be considered alongside the submerged environmentalism of the
Marxian “metabolism” between human and nature unearthed by John Bellamy Foster
in *Marx’s Ecology*---can be and, I suggest, should be, despite Gilman’s
important objection to Marx’s treatment of women in the workforce and her less
compelling dismissal of a straw-man Marxism. Additionally, the concept of the
garden puts Gilman in context as an early if unorthodox figure in American
environmentalism on top of her stable if controversial position in the history
of American feminism. Certainly all accounts of her work have had to grapple
with such multiple axes of consideration: the socialist, the feminist, the
environmentalist, the utopian thinker. Just as the plants in a well-planned
garden, the conversations that inhere in *Herland* exist in complex
interrelation, each offsetting and nurturing the others, together forming a
harmonious and complicated whole.
