Gilman's Garden: *Herland* and Literary Naturalism

##I. World as Garden, Garden as Home##

###A. **Description of the landscape/urban space of Herland:** forest, plains, and cities.###

-Forest recreates the idea of contained wilderness of the british landscape garden---the idea of "nature". 
		
-Plains between cities facilitate and model communication and transportation while providing distance between cities, contributing to the loosely federalist association of cities. 

-Cities tend to be similar without being entirely homogenous. (Is there indication of hierarchy?)

	B. **"Forest" as both verb and noun:** "foresters" link the fringe forests, the closest thing to wilderness, with gardening. Forests as both the thing on the edges---marginal space and buffer zone---and single apparent source of food. Allows coexistance of *gathering* and *cultivating* as models of sustenance. Not the agriculture of farming, yet not quite living off the fruit of the land. More like creating a land, the fruit of which may be lived off. Passages from Gilman's letters about sustenance gardening.

	C. Forest garden versus domestic (pleasure) gardens: apparently for leisure, open space in an urban setting---yet also indicating containment (they tend to have high walls; male cats are kept in walled gardens to prevent excess mating, the three male protagonists are only allowed in the home and the garden during their imprisonment). Links traditional domesticity with sexual duty and imprisonment. This domestic, non-productive "liesure" garden is the debased form of the productive garden above. Object of consumption rather than production.

	D. **Biographical basis for the consumption/production split with regard to domesticity:** At various points Gilman lives in collective housework communities with her mother and aunt (Harriet Beecher Stowe's sister). She apparently rejects the collective housework movements but later campaigns for kitchenless households; throughout her life frequents collectivist communities inspired by Fourier and Bellamy. Gilman's interest in kitchenless households contextualizes her understanding of a food source as communally produced and shared, also the revulsion to domestic house and garden work. See Walter Benn Michaels on Gilman's relationship to consumption and production; also potentially Jennifer Fleissner on domesticity ("The Great Indoors").

	E. **Garden as link between economic and domestic spheres:** Walter Benn Michaels again; perhaps Habermas on the origin of the oikos. Gilman's understanding of economy requires a comparison to Ebeneezer Howard of the Garden City movement, because Howard alone deals with the necessity of an economically self-sufficient community. Unlike Howard, though, Gilman's system is a closed circuit and does not participate in outside economies (even more closed than More's *Utopia*). Unifying the spheres of domestic and economic labor and removing the market leads to an economy of pure use-value (rather than exchange-value); the closedness and lack of market in many ways makes the economy more like an ecology, and the garden becomes as much an economic metaphor as anything. This self-sustaining ecology/economy in the absence of a market comes finally to define the basis of Gilman's garden. The work of self-sustenance is a form of production achieved on the collective scale. 
	
II. The Garden of Evolution

	- Domestic reform movements and Garden City movements are based on the idea that built environments can effect social reform; Gilman extends that deterministic argument further still, presenting a combination of social reform and environmental determination that allows a teleological construction of species.

	A. **Prevalence of planting/culling in Herland**---as extension of collective self-sufficiency via resource management. Non-domestic, non-agricultural food work is achieved entirely by means of culling or planting. Gilman's garden, and her sense of evolution, are inseperable from *telos* and controlled propagation

	B. **"Positive" and "Negative" eugenics:** But what is the difference between culling and planting as eugenic paradigms? Which does Gilman subscribe to? What are the implications of each, and how does Gilman's ethical system distinguish between the two? G privileges above all the individual's commitment to community via intentional reproduction (the only kind possible in Herland's parthenogenic system). This commitment leads ot the idea that reproduction is only socially laudable when undertaken for the betterment of the community. Obviously undergirded by a hugely problematic belief in genetically-determined behavioral traits, but Gilman seems to be very deliberately avoiding questions of race and and situations in which the individual is dominated by the collective.

	C. **Gilman and Lester F. Ward:** Basically summarize Cynthia Davis's excellent article, which reads Herland as a thought experiment based on a somewhat extended version of Lester F. Ward's theories. Ward is known mostly for theorizing eugenics. Like Gilman is hesitant to accept Darwinism; still likes Lamarck. Fiercely opposed to Herbert Spencer, competition as a productive paradigm, and laissez-faire economics, all of which can describe Gilman's vision in Herland as well. My goal will be to highlight Ward's and Gilman's shared interest in environmental determinism without downplaying their hugely problematic race/eugenics stuff.

	D. **Education as creation of social environment**: Teaching anti-competitive practices creates a beneficial social as well as developmental environment. Education becomes a means for the communal development of individuals. Social and environmental determinism combine in a built environment that models community values (e.g. no kitchens, no private property) and is supported, maintained, and constructed by the application of these values. I.E. since the built environment relies on a society of producers, the environment is built to instill valuation of production over consumption. (Consumerism: ownership as a type of consumption.)

	E. Thus Gilman's system of evolution is above all environmentally determined. Certainly all readings of her racism and condemnations of her system of eugenics obtain; nevertheless she subordinates the question of race to determination by environment. Examples of her wholesale opposition to biological determinism; examples of her interest in social/environmental determinism. Built environments in *Herland* are an evolutionary force that models Ward's move from "genetic" to "telic" (teleological) development, accepting determinism while taking control of deterministic forces. (Echoes of Marx's move from necessity to freedom in the social spehre.)
	
III. Gilman and Literary Naturalism

	-What is the relationship of *Herland* to literary naturalism? Whi is it problematic/difficult to read it as a naturalist work? What happens to the reading of the novel if we consider it in terms of naturalism, and what happens to naturalism if it is made to include this work?

	-Gilman critiques literary naturalism by juxtaposing a vision of the destructive competition of the wilderness with the cooperative development of the garden paradigm---in doing so, she also critiques Spencerian social Darwinism, and with it the philosophical commitments of many considered as part of the naturalist movement. Nevertheless, because she continues the discussions central to naturalism and appropriates some of its formal features it is useful to consider *Herland* as a work of naturalism as well as a critique of its mainlines---she asserts a strong position on determinism and offers a revision to social Darwinism rather than a refutation of it; she uses what Pizer calls the naturalist symbol and replicates the adventure/exploration narrative. This intervention is achieved through a welding of the traditional utopian genre  with the forms and philosophies associated with naturalism. The tension etween these two movements is resolved by the garden and, by extension, Gilman's feminist, socialist, communal self-construction. The result is a rebuttal to Spencerianism rendered all the more powerful because it accepts many of the same premises while arriving at a vastly different conclusion.

	A. **The state of literary naturalism:** overview of Pizer, Walcutt, Michaels, and others. My approach to naturalism will be building on Jennifer Fleissner's polemical refocusing of the conversation via "compulsion" and the "modern young woman" as a naturalist subject. Nevertheless I will also be dealing with the more traditional ideas of naturalism because of Gilman's apparent consciousness of and response to the masculinist and Spencerian traditions. In virtually all discussions of naturalism the relevant topics include: determinism versus individual agency/power; the role of evolution/social Darwinism in cultural formation (extension of the above); the place of the individual in the collective; the simultaneous acceptance of scientific and magical systems of understanding. Also, briefly, a comparison of the mainlines of Gilman scholarship with those of naturalism.

	B. **Gilman as a responsive writer:** see the aforementioned essay by Davis on Gilman's response to Ward; essay on Gilman revising the Western genre; Gilman's use of sources generally. The point here is that it's reasonable to think of Gilman's work as in part response/rebuttal to contemporaneous thought and writing based on other precedents.

	C. **Competition (as major topic of social Darwinism and literary naturalism)**: Revisit the deterministic and evolutionary elements discussed aabove in terms of competition. In all cases competition is disallowed by the logic of teleological and communal development/maintenance. The garden structure of Herland becomes a model of social, military, and economic regulation that spurs rather than hinders development (contra neoliberalism and social Darwinism). Depiction of competition as destructive.

	D. **Gilman's utopian naturalism**: Revision to this mode of competition occurs in athletic metaphor, and it marks a distinctive formal split between the pseudo-adventure genre---a lampooned strain of naturalism---and the properly utopian genre. This split is evident in the changing plot structure as well as the the protagonists' sudden fascination with the environment, society, and history; the explanatory mode that some have called essayistic. This shift in focus adheres to the formal caesura of Sir Thomas More's *Utopia*, which Jameson and or Ernst Bloch ID as part of the dual nature of the utopian genre---satire and the vision of perfection/reform in close proximity. For Gilman this split takes the form of the dominant philosophy and her suggested revision to it: the world according to the masculanist/adventurist perspective; the utopian feminist/socialist vision. It also "solves" many of the problems that interest naturalists with the features shared by the garden and the utopian genre---a closed system, abolition of the market (pure use-value), teleological development, etc.

	E. Finally, Gilman uses her socialist, feminist garden to resolve or excape from the structure of compulsion that Fleissner identifies in naturalism and which characterizes G's ealier and more famous "Yellow Wallpaper": there is no tension between the individual will and determinism (condition of Fleissner's compusion) because the individual will contributes to the construction of deterministic forces. The garden is an attempt to resolve (in an admittedly magical, utopian, and politically problematic way) the tensions of naturalism. The repetetive, compulsive failure to move forward of Fleissner's reading of the naturalist "modern young woman" becomes a utopian development inward. Expansion is replaced by refinement of the built environment and social values.