At various points throughout her life, Charlotte Perkins Gilman lived in experimental collectivist communities. When she was a teenager, to take an early example, she went with her recently divorced mother to participate in a cooperative housekeeping movement in Providence, Rhode Island. Though not impressed---she left after a dispute with the psychic who led the cooperative after a dispute over thoughts Gilman may or may not have had---it seems that the experience set a precedent for Gilman’s own reformist ambitions (Davis *Charlotte* 31-2).  Later she would life in communal households devoted to social reform at a time when such design projects were seen as possible sites of social change, though she apparently never stayed for long. Nevertheless, the  From the first, environmental factors were related in Gilman’s life to issues of labor and social reform; though a theme in much of her work, this relationship does not ultimately come to fruition until the publication of *Herland*.


The understanding of the society as itself a kind of garden surmounts and contains all these, however, and taking this image as a conceptual frame for the rest of the utopian vision re-contextualizes its defining features. Though smaller iterations of the garden like those described above present subtly different permutations of the its function in society, the framing garden is consistently represented as an entity that is closed to the outside, ecologically managed in order to preclude destructive competition, and defined by an aesthetic that privileges functionality above all else. Recognizing the garden as a frame reveals, on a socio-biological level, a view of anti-competitive social Darwinism in which collective control of the environment determines the development of the species. On the cultural and economic level, it reveals a ludic revision of the work-ethic that keeps the society at full employment while simultaneously eliminating labor as a discrete activity. Finally, on the literary and critical level, the garden reveals a polemical rejoinder to masculine naturalist writing that depicts environment as a site of competition, competition as an empowerment of the individual, and the individual as the driving force of society. That these diverse premises are all presented in the same terms underscores the extent to which Gilman’s utopia is predicated on the harmonious interleaving of the built and natural environments that the garden represents.