---
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
date: May 6, 2014
coursename: Harlem Renaissance
profname: Professor Robert O’Meally
title: Title
---

Jean Renoir’s 1927 satirical science-fiction film, *Sur un air de Charleston*, was not well received when it was shown for the first time in Paris, nor for that matter has it received the acclaim of his other work in the years since. It appears to have been created as a lark, a coincidence of Renoir’s burgeoning interest in African-American culture via *La Revue Negre*, a need to use up some leftover film, and an opportunity to capture the graces of his wife, Catherine Hessling, on camera. After the film’s completion and lackluster, Renoir would vow (not for the first time) to give up filmmaking (Bertin 66-7). For Johnny Hudgins, however, the film’s star, *Charleston* was one stop on a European tour that would land him alongside artists like Josephine Baker, performing in cabarets throughout the continent, and even giving private dancing lessons to the Prince of Wales in Buckingham Palace (“Hudgins and Wife Write to Whitney,” “Johnny Hudgins Joins Blackbirds”, Kraut 179). Whatever it was for its creators, today the film is fascinating from several different angles: as an artifact of dance history, early filmmaking, and, most notably for the purposes of this paper, as one of the only surviving records of a once-famous black entertainer whose comedic genius made him as famous in Paris as he was in Harlem. The film is also, however, a cutting satirical look at the European treatment of African and African-American culture. Its premise is that an African explorer (Hudgins) travels in his spherical flying machine to the “terres inconnues” of Paris in 2028, which has been destroyed by “the next great war.” There, he finds a woman dressed in tatters and leaves (Hessling), accompanied by an ape companion. Hessling dances the Chalreston, which Hudgins recognizes as the long-lost dance of his “ancestors” (“aïeux”), and after placing a call to a bevy of angels in operator gear he decides to learn it. What follows is a dancing “lesson,” in fact a performance, in which both dance the Charleston and Hudgins performs some of the maneuvers that had made his name around the world. The film concludes as both climb into Hudgins’s flying machine and depart, presumably for Africa. 

Though a dance performance constitutes most of this seventeen-minute film, much of the force of its satire comes from the science-fictional premise and its carnivalesque inversion of social status and racial projections, and the emphasis of the satire and the film as a whole lands on the figure of the primitive. Though the term “primitive” is never used, certain unmistakable emblems identify it: we first find Hessling pulling on a vine for a comically long time before an ape appears on the end of it; the ape then searches her hair for edibles, which Hessling welcomes, and in this cross-species social interaction the two figures are linked. In contrast, Hudgins fully assumes the characteristics of a privileged upper-class whose interactions with the primitive figure are at different points frightened and anthropological. Adding the figure of the primitive to Hudgins’s usual parody gives it an additional and provocative inflection, namely, the interaction between social strata and the logic of the primitivizing gaze. The strategies by which this gaze is put under pressure and exposed will be the topic of this paper: to be understood *Sur un air de Charleston*, must be considered not only as a three-way collaboration between Renoir, Hessling, and Hudgins, but also as an opportunity for all three to comment upon the logic of international black celebrity and the complex primitivism that frequently undergirded it in the early twentieth century. In what follows, I will ask what effect the film’s temporal strategy has on its satirical treatment of primitivism, arguing that it exposes the role of false origin narratives in European spectatorship of African and African-American culture. I will discuss several of the film’s diverse contexts to illuminate the extent of its playful polemic, including Hudgins’s career and status as a public figure, the long history of conflicting claims over cultural authority of the Charleston, and the complex topic of black minstrelsy generally. Finally, I will show that the film uses its temporal conceit to critique the erasure of actual historical and social conditions with false and ultimately opportunistic narratives by a ruling class.

***

The search for origins and the unknown is presented immediately by *Charleston*’s opening sequence, and this sense of an archeological search frames the rest of what follows. Hudgins, inside his spherical flying machine, looks at a map of his destination, an un-demarcated France with “TERRES INCONNUES” (‘unknown lands’) as its label, and this early invocation of the unknown cues us to detect acts of searching and discovery. The invocation of a terra incognita indicates that Hudgins’s character is a kind of imperial figure, an inversion of French colonial adventurism in Africa, but it also demonstrates the relevance of knowledge and discovery to the colonial project---the reason for Hudgins’s expedition is the existence of a terra incognita at all, which is a condition of mapping. The presence of a map and the explicit indication of Africa and France leaves no room for ambiguity as to the locations and cultures the film is considering in relation. In context with the inversion of comparative wealth, power, and technology between the two places, the future the French audience is being asked to consider becomes clear: one in which France is the site of the unknown instead of Africa, and in which the Western identity and culture are no longer in the subject-position of anthropological “discovery.” If the search projects the unknown onto France, the discovery projects onto it the status of a presumed source of origin through the recognition of historical traces. In this case, the Charleston is the key by which Hudgins recognizes the mark of his “forefathers” in Hessling, and this recognition makes him stop fearing her. The unknown and the origin are shown to be inherently related, and both are displaced onto a farcical France.

These depictions of the 1920s are counterfactual, of course, and in addition to humorous effect such counterfactuality highlights the act of misrecognition inherent in considering the “primitive” subject, specifically the false attribution of origin onto the figure of the African. The film makes explicit what is only too clear in the treatment of black performance in the period, namely that the European spectators frequently sees in the black performer some key to their own distant, often implicitly baser or more sensual, primordial self. The role of such origin in the film becomes comprehensible only in considering the trope of the hundred-year-leap. The film is set one hundred years after the date of its release, a setting made more complex by the counter-factual archeology: the characters in the future are searching for information about their past, which the reference point of the Charleston identifies as the audience’s present; and yet the past they “discover,” though presented as a moment of shared culture and presumably shared ancestry, is actually marked by precisely the same process in reverse. Several premises are implicit here. To begin, it implies that Africa and persons of African descent might one day be culturally, economically, and technologically dominant, rebutting the idea (perhaps more American than French) of natural racial inferiority.^[That this premise has to be presented as a fantasy or carnivale implies its own problematic assumptions about the state of the present. “Some day” implies “not now.”] Another implication is that, in 1927, the Charleston is a shared aspect of African and white European culture: Hudgins refers to it as “la danse traditionelle des Blancs” at one point, and as “la danse de nos loin-tains aïeux” at another---it is the traditional dance of both “the whites” and “our distant forefathers,” implying that the two are one and the same. This fact is presented as a joke along with the other inversions, and so can be taken as a willfully counterfactual assertion. Nevertheless, in the world of the film, the Charleston becomes a link between the white and black subject, situated in a past rendered knowable only through cultural remnants. Finally, this temporality and context of inversion implies that the misrecognition, occurring in a future that looks back on the audience’s present, is also occurring in the audience’s present regarding its own past. That is, just as Hudgins reads a false origin in the “primitive” figure of Hessling, European whites are reading (and looking for) a false past in the figures onto whom they project their primitivism: the black artists like Hudgins who produce allegedly ancestral or primitive works. Indeed, the contention of the film seems to be that the primitivist gaze of 1920s Europe relies on just such a misreading. While this misreading occurs and Hessling parodies what is seen by the primitivizing spectator, the actor in the ape costume clowns in the background, as if a mocking reminder both of the idea of (evolutionary) origins and the ultimate logical extension of the reductive European gaze. 

These issues of false origin come to a head in the centerpiece of the film, a farcical dancing lesson in which Hessling teaches Hudgins the Charleston, and Hudgins’s own international celebrity and recognizable performance tropes come to bear on the film’s satirical message. After a nearly inexplicable scene in which Hudgins telephones an arrangement of winged heads in operator’s headphones to tell them that he is going to learn the Charleston, the “lesson” begins. The scene takes up the majority of the rest of the film, and it begins with Hessling luring a demonstrably reluctant Hudgins onto a concrete dance floor. At first, she slowly performs the motions of the Charleston for Hudgins to mimic, which he does expertly after more feigned hesitation. Before long, though, Hudgins begins to perform some of his signature moves, which Hessling imitates, creating an obvious problem: Hudgins, the alleged student, performs the moves much more skillfully and deftly than his teacher. Where he is able to swing his right leg forward and backward while his left foot slides to and fro on the ground, rocking him back and forth and rotating him simultaneously, a slow-motion closeup of Hessling shows that her own version of the move lacks the characteristic smoothness and majesty of Hudgins’s performance. This inconsistency between premise and actuality only foregrounds an irony that has been the source for much of the film’s humor up to that point: Hudgins was widely recognized at the time as a master of the dance he is pretending to learn, and he is learning it from one of the people to whom he (or the culture he represents) is supposed to have introduced the Charleston in the first place. This inverted act of pedagogy is most notable in two particular gestures. In the first, Hudgins performs a slow turn-in-place of his body by manipulating his feet without lifting them; the second gesture, mentioned above, involves swinging one leg one hundred and eighty degrees like a pendulum while the other foot slides back and forth across the floor. Both moves are recorded in a clip from the same year entitled “Feet—Fun—and Fancy,” and at least the slow turn is described in writing in a pamphlet with which Hudgins intended to copyright his act, which he considered his original intellectual property. Calling his turn-in-place the “Ball Bearing Pivot,” he describes the move in enough detail that it could presumably be identified and attributed to its inventor: he calls it “a complete pivot turn, turning very, very slowly, crossing my feet and not taking them off the floor while turning, whilst staying in one spot on the stage.”^[This pamphlet is reproduced in Brent Edwards’s lecture on the film, “Renoir and Surrealist Paris in Black and White,” where he also discusses the significance of the dance-off and the authority implicit in acts of pedagogy. For more on Hudgins and intellectual property in performance of the period, see Anthea Kraut’s “‘Stealing Steps’ and Signature Moves: Embodied Theories of Dance as Intellectual Property.”] What Hessling is teaching Hudgins, Hudgins already knows, because he himself invented it; as with everything else in the film, attributes usually ascribed to one character are projected onto the other in a carnivalesque inversion, forcing a 1920s French audience to reconsider the the way those traits have been applied in their own world of the present.

As Brent Edwards points out in his 2013 lecture on the film, the concern with authorship and origin displayed in Hudgins’s pamphlet comes to a head in *Charleston* through the reversal of the student and teacher roles in the dancing scene (“Renoir and Surrealist Paris”); these issues of originality also point to a broader concern in the film with the difficulty of determining origin and cultural ownership. There is perhaps no more notable site for the debate over cultural authority in the ‘20s than the Charleston, as the history of the dance itself is a history of its disputed roots. It is certain that the dance was launched into the mainstream by *Runnin’ Wild*, a 1923 Broadway musical with music by James P. Johnson, lyrics by Cecil Mack, a book by F. E. Miller and Aubrey Lyles, and choreography by Lyda Webb (Emery 226-7, Haim 51). A stable history that goes any deeper, however, is more difficult to come by, in large part because of deliberate appropriation of authorship away from black artists. Lynn Fauley Emery suggests that the “Charleston probably came from the ‘star’ or challenge dances which were all a part of the dance called Juba” (227). James P. Johnson himself points to the “people…from South Carolina and Georgia where the cotillion was popular—and the ‘Charleston’ was an offspring of that. It was a dance figure like the ‘Balmoral.’ A lot of my music is based on set, cotillion and other southern country dance steps and rhythms” (qtd. in Haim 51). The question of where to place origin seems to be a question of how far back one traces the dance: Johnson refers to dances like the “Balmoral” and “cotillion” as “southern country dance steps,” but these dance steps themselves have roots, leaving them open to disputed cultural authorship. These difficulties range from an indeterminate set of criteria for asserting origin to attempts to usurp credit, both of which are also presented in Renoir’s filmic commentary on the Charleston.

Newspaper articles on the Charleston between 1925 and 1926 reflect this conflict, ranging from reports on worldwide bans of the dance to attempts by white authors and dance authorities to lay claim to it based on its allegedly Gallic, rather than African, basis (Haim 52). Jane Grant reported for the *New York Times* in a 1925 article entitled “The Charleston Prances into Favor” that the “origin of the Charleston has been an enigma. In spite of the claims made by Broadway and Harlem, and even Chicago,…the dance came into being among the negroes of the south.” But less than a year later in the same paper, Fred Austin would claim a French ancestry for the dance in “The Charleston Traces its Ancestry Back 400 Years.” Beginning the article polemically with a sentence that leans heavily on a white European set of historical referents, he writes, 

>While Europe was still thrilled over the discovery of America by Columbus and the Middle Ages were disappearing under the influence of the Renaissance, Don John of Austria rode poste haste from Brussels and secretly entered Paris for the sole purpose of seeing Marguerite de Valois, sister of King Francis I, dance the Charleston! 

Austin continues to suggest that the more specific origin of the dance is the Branle, a dance “favored by noble and yokel alike for two centuries.” In terms of cultural authority, Austin’s source here is crucial: he is making these claims based on the comments of Leo Staats, then director of the ballet of the Paris Opera. Staats was apparently making the rounds of New York dancing circles, seizing every opportunity to stick a French flag in the Charleston: several months prior to Austin’s article, a shorter piece appeared in the *New York Times* entitled “Charleston Splits Dancing Teachers” paraphrases Staats as saying: “Americans…can be very good dancers. They have a wonderful sense of rhythm and their interest in athletics also helps, but he [Staats] doubts their patience and endurance for serious dancing.” Though Staats says this of “Americans,” white Americans were saying the same thing of African-Americans, as Emery points out via an article by Roark Bradford, also from 1926, called “New Orleans Negro Declared Not Guilty of the Charleston.” This article’s argument is quite similar, but racially rather than nationally inflected: according to Bradford, “no Negro ever originated anything that required as much physical exertion as the present brand of Charleston” (qtd. in Emery 226). 1926, a good if complicated press year for the Charleston, wrapped up with a short article called “War on Charleston as Old Kaffir Dance” in which the unnamed *Times* correspondent says that South African Christian churches “declared war” on the dance because it is “essentially a Kaffir dance and that the performance of it by whites lowers their [the Kaffirs’] prestige in the native eyes.” The story of the Charleston as told by reporters in the two years leading up to Renoir’s filmic intervention is a story of disputed ownership, and it becomes a site of a larger transatlantic, transracial, and transhistorical culture war. By the time Hessling and Hudgins have their competition in pedagogical guise, the stage has already been well set. 

The relevance of these quarrels to Hudgins’s own career are clear—Hudgins was invited to give the Prince of Wales Charleston lessons at Buckingham Palace, and the Charleston was a major part of the *Blackbirds* show and other black performances in France at the time (most notably Josephine Baker, who is most frequently credited for bringing the Charleston to France) (Edwards, Haim 51-2). The disputed origins implicit in the film’s dance-off, then, are multifaceted, encompassing Hudgins’s own artistic output, the fight over ownership of the Charleston, and racial authority in cultural production more generally. Returning to the scene with these larger contexts in mind deepens the satirical focus of *Charleston*’s inversion: in one sense, as discussed above, it is preposterous for Hudgins to be learning his own patented moves from Hessling, moves that are recognizable to an audience familiar with the *Blackbirds* show and *La Revue Negre*; but with the focus on the Charleston and that dance’s own questions of authorship---questions that certain French ballet directors and white American racists were resolving opportunistically for themselves---the conflict expands to racial and national scales. 

It is in this sense of racism and malignant nationalism that we can understand the complicated implications of the film’s post-apocalyptic setting with regard to primitivism and cultural authority. The film, as mentioned above, is set in a version of France destroyed by another world war---as Edwards mentions, a subtitle sets the viewer somewhat presciently “after the next world war,” which France does not survive intact. But what is the purpose of such a setting, and how does it affect the film’s complicated relationship to the historical and anthropological search for origins? The answer comes with consideration of the film’s attempt to posit a harmonious racial present for 1927, a present which future travelers can take as a common origin of the races. The only way such a present can exist is by destroying the actual France of 1927 and with it all the history of complex racial relations. What remains is a blank slate of destruction, an empty field for convenient projections of falsified histories, and it takes just such a blank slate to isolate the Charleston as a sole and uncomplicated piece of evidence. This message could be read as ultimately hopeful, as saying that if everyone (black and white) could forget a larger history of racial tensions, the Charleston could indeed be a unifying cultural object; even if so, it would be optimism dulled by the impossibility of such a unification under present circumstances. Another, more compelling reading, and one that seems to cleave more firmly to the satirical play on origin and authorship in the dancing scene, is that the film uses its post-apocalyptic setting to foreground the destructive erasure of historical conditions that already takes place in spectatorial searches for origin. Such searches are implicit in the primitivizing gaze, and they are also implicit in the willfully revisionist histories of dance that falsely appropriate cultural authority over artistic phenomena. In this latter reading, the destruction of France can be understood as the destruction of *actual* African and African-American cultural history in favor of a more comfortable version of it. The comedic ending-with-a-marriage (of sorts), in which Hessling goes off with Hudgins and the ape waves them off, is the logical extension of Hudgins’s discovery of racial unity---namely, a reunification of the racialized societies. The resolution rings hollow, however, given that the common origin on which it is based is only a common origin if all history prior to 1927 is eliminated, either through convenient forgetting or physical annihilation. Depending on where one supposes the intent of the filmmakers to lie, such exposure of underlying falsity is either accidental, revealing the naïveté of the simplistic harmony they attempt to posit, or a critique of any view of black performance that calls itself tolerant while simultaneously washing over the reality of discrimination and history of oppression.

This exposure of the constructed narrative that overrides and eliminates the true and less comfortable one resonates with the complicated logic of black performers in blackface. The relationship of European spectatorship to blackface is a difficult to pin down---and especially  in this film, since the blackface performer as an element of minstrelsy is an emphatically American construct, and yet Hudgins’s character is *African*. Edwards raises this issue and points out that the entrance of black performers into the tradition of minstrelsy has a long history as an occasion for performers to question the concept of blackness in locales far from the American home of minstrelsy (“Renoir and Surrealist Paris”). Certainly, Hudgins is a part of this tradition. When he brings the performance to France, however, he finds that the French do not know what to make of his use of the burnt-cork mask. Hudgins himself writes of this fact in a fascinating and somewhat cryptic passage in a letter to the editor of the *Chicago Defender* while he and his wife were in Paris:

>You know these French people here really do not understand what the American Negro is, and they know nothing about the phrase ‘Colored,’ and they really think it is terrible that I should black up. I have received all sorts of letters asking me what it is all about, and that they would much rather see me natural, and, believe me, I have to do a mean piece of explaining. It is not that they mean any harm, but they really don’t know. (“Hudgins and Wife”)

It is by no means clear just what Hudgins’s “mean piece of explaining” would consist of. One assumes that it would entail an explanation of the racial discrimination and oppression that prevent black performers from appearing as they are, maintaining the illusion of a white performer mocking a black subject. And yet, there is something in Hudgins’s letter to suggest that his “black[ing] up” is in some way an interaction with the identity of “the American Negro.” It may be that he refers to just such an interrogation of blackness as Edwards describes, and that the misunderstanding on the part of the French is the conflation of *being* black with *performing* a harmful imitation of blackness. Whatever the specifics of his views on blackface, one thing is certain: by 1931, four years after *Charleston* and three after his return to the United States, Hudgins would stop “black[ing] up” to perform. An article from that year, entitled “Hudgins Cuts Black Face; Proves Point,” announces this change. The article is somewhat curious, however, in that it emphasizes the talent it takes for Hudgins to be able to still enthrall without his makeup. That this argument needs to be made at all reveals an underlying assumption about black minstrelsy, namely that the power of the performance was presumed to be not in the performers of that tradition but in the tradition itself. Hudgins’s unmasking removes the authority of the performance from the tradition he inherits and allows him to lay claim to it. It is, in a way, another instance of insisting on credit for his unique creations: just as he is unwilling for his comic act to be attributed to those who imitate it, he is unwilling to have his performance appropriated in advance by the tradition that dictates his makeup.

Hudgins’s insistence on seeing the person behind the mask is echoed and furthered by *Charleston*’s critique of false attributions of origin. In both cases, a logic akin to Jean Baudrillard’s “hyperreal” is exposed and used to critique contemporary understandings of race. The hyperreal refers to a representation without an original, an imitation of an imitation, and it it is useful in considering minstrelsy when one considers the figure in blackface not as an imitation of actual African-Americans but the construction of a new figure through imitation of a non-existent identity. The black performer in blackface becomes in this sense a representation of a representation, creating yet another figure with its own unique and parodic character, a figure the very existence of which is already a critique of what has come before it. Similarly, the logic of the archeological construction of the present that occurs in the historical “look backward” from 2028 is a reconstruction of a period that, as the audience knows very well, never exists. In both cases, the emphasis falls on what is destroyed in order for the fiction to be maintained. The post-apocalypse that appears in *Charleston*’s France is just such a destruction, but so, crucially, is the makeup of minstrelsy. The hyperreality of the black performer in blackface, presenting an institutionalized misrepresentation of blackness, comes under particular pressure in terms of this “original” figure, as such performance is similarly guided by a true identity being forcefully overridden by a falsification of itself. Behind the burnt-cork mask, the truth of the performer’s identity is occluded, just as the true nature of race relations in 1920s France is occluded behind the false unity of the “shared” cultural fragment of the Charleston. Whether with reference to the primitivizing gaze of white Europeans, the appropriation of authorship over dances like the Charleston, or the erasure of actual racial identities in favor of false constructions of them, *Sur un air de Charleston* is an effective satirical critique of the destruction of reality by hyperreality and willful ignorance of historical oppression.


This reading of *Sur un air de Charleston* has taken as its underlying assumption that the film’s whimsy is a satirical guise for a serious set of premises about cultural authority and race relations in Europe in the 1920s. This view is by no means inconsistent with many understandings of Renoir’s larger oeuvre. Lee Russel, for example, writing in 1964, says of him that

>[t]he truth is that Renoir’s work is a coherent whole. The mainspring of his thought has always been the question of the natural man: nature and artifice, Pan and Faust, natural harmony.…[He] recognizes the existence of social classes and nationalities—he is fascinated by them, as phenomena—but he insists that these differences need not divide men in their human essence. (Russel “Jean Renoir”)

And although much criticism of Renoir skates over this film, with one critic saying that the implications of its inversions “hardly need spelling out,” it becomes more complicated when placed in a wider context (Durgnat 44). By focusing on the Charleston, Johnny Hudgins, and especially the use of a speculative temporal trope, the intent of this paper has been to question the apparent simplicity of the film as well as to use it as a vehicle to discuss the fascinating career of Johnny Hudgins in addition to the career of Jean Renoir.