---
geometry:margin=1in
---

# Prologue

"I don't really think this is worth another shot, to be honest, not without
more information about what's up there, or isn't up there, or, you know, what
it is that we're doing here, or why," Mac began, intending to continue and
shifting his weight behind the concrete barrier. 

"It was your idea, Mac." Rachel looked through her binoculars, on her haunches.
She did not shift her weight. 

"Not strictly true. Or even true."

"Mmm." 

His pack's straps cut into his shoulders. He was cold from the dawn breeze even
though his sweat had dried hours ago, after their first attempt to take the
hill.  They were on the edge of an ex-strip mall, looking across a long parking
lot and a field that was just as dead. Past that was the hill, the only
passable face of the plateau that held the enormous complex that brought them
here. The plateau looked out of place enough that Mac had wondered if it were
man-made. He had checked the thought as implausible, then realized, no, given
who had owned the servers in that complex, it was almost probable. 

He shoved Rachel off balance and held a hand out for the binoculars. 

The sun rose at its usual clip a few degrees off from the hill, and in its
light he could just make them out. The line of trucks advanced toward the gate
at the top of the busted road, and Mac could almost hear the reinforced solar
panels rattle in the truck beds next to the broadcasting gear that sent them up
the hill in the first place.

The convoy slunk up the hill like it had been scolded, certain enough that
whoever had killed Jefferson had taken themselves along with him, yet still
made tentative by the simple fact of it, his sudden absence in a moment of
light, smoke, and confusion. There had been no convoy when he went up, just
him, as he had insisted, with a light pack and a dim memory of how these people
used to operate. That and his usual self-certainty. He had reached the top,
looked around, and waved. 

Then he had gone inside. Two minutes later a flash, a puff of smoke, and
nothing. That had been at midnight, and it took them three hours to resolve to
go after him. 

All but Mac and Rachel, who were somehow supposed to come up with Plan B if the
rest went the way of Jefferson. 

The trucks stopped thirty yards short of the gate, as planned. Tom hopped out
and slammed the door, which made Mac wince even though he couldn't hear it.
Tom's burly frame rounded the front-most truck as he advanced, shotgun clutched
in his fist like a bludgeon. 

Rachel's weight did shift now. Mac glanced over and saw one thigh tense up
below the cuff of her shorts. Whatever she was thinking, her response was to
whip her rifle around and settle its barrel on the barrier in front of her.
What she thought she would do from there was anyone's guess, but Mac
understood.

Tom advanced, flanked now by half a dozen others who had exited the remaining
vehicles with more discretion. Tom held up a hand to stop them when he was
within a short dash of the entrance. Making that dash, he disappeared around
the corner, and across the field Mac and Rachel caught their breaths. 

Moments passed in which nothing moved but the sun. 

Then Tom reappeared and everyone jumped, raising their weapons, lucky not to
fire. Then he was doubled over, and Rachel stood, and Mac was sure he was shot. 

But when he reared back again everyone realized he was laughing. Rachel
switched the safety on her rifle and threw it across the barrier. Mac declined
to vomit and hauled her around the barrier by the hand as Tom waved his arms
from the top of the hill. The sun cut across the dismal beige of the one-time
field, which crunched under their boots as they made the long sprint.

<br>

Jefferson's only affliction had been the knowledge that they'd assume he was
dead, the realization that he'd have to piss where he slept for the night, and
occasional (largely ignored) pangs of fear that they wouldn't, indeed the
knowledge that they shouldn't, follow after him. His main response to this
trauma had been to eat a Snickers bar, the sell-by date of which (May 15 2065)
was the only real indication of danger he had encountered, and to fall asleep. 

When they had rammed the double-doors in and made him a little more
comfortable, he explained that he had been locked in when he tried to key the
access code for the interior door. The lights had worked until then, but when
he tried to access the security terminal, everything had gone *pop*. That, they
assumed, was the flash of light and smoke they had seen, though nobody was sure
whether that was a security system functioning or every other system
malfunctioning. No matter now.

When his story had been extracted and everyone gathered outside the main gate,
it was a few hours from midday. Ramming the doors had taken time, clapping
Jefferson on the shoulder and extracting his story even more, and determining
whether the larger gate could be made accessible for the trucks even more time
than that. By the time they seduced the gates into rumbling open, it was almost
noon. By the time they had remembered their probable danger and formed teams
for the entry, it was almost one. 

<!--checkpoint-->

...

The town's trees, such as they were, proved to be plaster. They increased in
density as a function of distance from the server farm, just as the roads
widened on the approach. One-lane roads multiplied to two as they crossed the
town limits; added a lane as they got within a few blocks, at which point they
were almost moving parking lots. And based on the rusting, comatose Hondas and
Teslas dotting some of the wider roads, they may well have become parking lots
as the day wore on. Some of them had their windows down, but nothing was
smashed or dented.

So it had been in the whole town. If there had been fires, they had been small
and had not spread. If there had been riots, they were somewhere else, or the
rioters had been murdered before they could get around to any serious business.
The previous-generation Macs in the refurbished gear shops testified that there
had been no looting. Either that, or the distaste for last-generation tech had
survived the collapse, like the proverbial cockroach in a nuclear fallout. Or
maybe, thought Mac, nobody had much use for computers at all anymore.

Whatever the reasons, the streets were wide and clean, the sidewalks affording
almost misanthropic distance between people (had people been there to walk on
them). Mac and the rest fanned out, their weapons getting further and further
from hand. Seeing a place so unruined put them all in a state of reverie that
left no room for conversation. Coffee shops alternated with bars and the
occasional restaurant, which for their purposes left very little of interest.
They didn't pass a single grocery store. 

# 1

Mac stepped outside and knew before the screen door closed that he would need a
new word for the morning. Matte and thick, the red hardly varied as it got
further from the dull sun it emerged from. As though the light were more resilient
somehow, or maybe dead on arrival. He looked down at the notebook.

*monday 9.30.65 - see 8.20.63*
*Tuesday 10.1.65 - cheap lipstick*
*wednesday 10.2.65 - ugly banana*
*thursday 10.3.65 - velvet rope*

He looked back through September, August. "Third degree rugburn" was close, but
this was denser, less alive. He wrote, quickly, *friday 10.4.65 - late soviet*,
shut the cover, went inside.

The water for coffee was boiling over the little cook stove. He turned the
flame down and tried to remember when he stopped guessing light wavelengths in
his book of mornings, when *612 nm* became *congressman's spray-on tan*. It was
when Rachel started asking, too gently, who he was recording it for, he
thought. But no. It was when she stopped asking, wasn't it. That was when he
found himself punching the wavelengths into his database without even the
promise of anyone asking about it. 

Forget the promise of those wavelengths adding up to anything. That hope, had
it ever existed, was well faded. And even a conclusive result would just give
him a different angle on what he already knew. So he began punching text in,
ignoring the irate *TypeError* messages when his algorithms tried to do
derivatives on his jokes to nobody. 

In the ersatz kitchen his morning grew into itself, from late-soviet red into a
saturated tangerine, through the spectrum that felt at once produced and
accidental. 

<br>

It was the Week of the Rain Catchers. That was what they called it when the hue
of their water became red and grainy like dregs from a martian well, and they
remembered---*Hey, yeah, the rain catchers*. At the end of the week of rain
catchers they got around to fixing them, and thus ended the ritual.

Rachel's soft-brimmed hat poked above the frontmost row of sheet metal, widely
corrugated. She was carefully scraping some of the red dust into a plastic
container, to analyze later as best she could. They were really her baby, and
one of the many means by which she had kept the three of them going, but the
work happened on her terms, not the terms of their need. Tom was hammering the
last of the thin aluminum into the same corrugations, grunting and annoyed. His
thick arms made the aluminum ring. He liked it, he wouldn't let Mac or Rachel
help the with the corrugating. But he liked nothing so much as wordless
complaints, so every Week of the Rain Catchers Tom's short beard would bristle
with perspiration and refused offers of help.

Mac glanced nervously at the annotated plans and back to the maze of PVC
piping in front of him. The piping was chaos. Back down at the plans. The plans
were chaos. Downloaded from Wikipedia's remnants two years ago and printed on
the back of a dead man's tax form, they had been handled until they developed
the wavy translucency of something recently soggy. 

[The page's title was "DIY Rain Catchers" and would definitely not have been
left up when Wikipedia was still being maintained. But once the pedants who
kept its knowledge clean no longer had time, so it returned to the Wild West
that it was at its beginning. That meant that articles like this started to
crop up, which in all probability had saved a life or two. It also meant that
most of what was useful had since dissolved. Even their printout had a
pointilist portrait of a penis dropped into the "references" section, which
nobody had bothered to remove.] Mac turned the page to consult Rachel's
meticulous addenda.

"Mac!" 

He turned and saw Rachel looking at him. She looked concerned under her floppy
hat. 

"What's going on?" 

"Nothing." 

"You know what you're supposed to be doing?"

He looked back down at the plans. "Not really. I can't remember where I'm
supposed to put this thing." 

Rachel blinked and put down her container of rust scrapings. "Well, so what's the
only place you see wide enough to fit the catcher and with enough height
relative to the barrels?"

Tom looked around again. They were up a slight, broad hill from the small,
two-story house the three of them shared, off to his right. Rain catchers
crowded the space in front of him, the greenhouses walled him in behind. Beyond
the rain catchers the hill dropped off. A few trees made plaintive starts for
the clouds, and beyond that, the valley and its many ex-houses, stripped of
what made them shelter, lined the single street of what was once Pequot.

Turning his survey back to the row of catchers, Mac saw the one mud-slick
patch that was visible through the shantytown of corrugated sheeting.

"Right. Got it, Rachel." 

Rachel nodded and went back to her rust. Mac trudged through mud toward more
mud.

<br>

When Mac woke up that first day of the Week of the Rain Catchers, he did so
with a sense of clarity that had become unusual. His mind had been wandering
for most of the previous year, he felt, as though it were a profligate son from
a wealthy family. Which, Mac thought, turning his own metaphor over in his
hands, would make him a kind of distressed uncle, taking a solicitous interest
in the boy. In his own mind.

And there it went again, that old mind. But he was determined, and regained his
sense of focus. He sat up in bed and looked around the cramped, narrow room for
his glasses. Red sun tinted the bedsheet he used for a curtain and the room it
guarded. The glasses could be anywhere. Carefully he stood up and picked
through the detritus of de- and reconstructed computers, wired together almost
as a single organism, its organs linked in configurations he hardly remembered
the purpose of and therefore dared not touch. From underneath a tangled rope of
cables, one wayward arm of his glasses poked out, waving at him. 

He put them on. They were dirty, but the sense of clarity remained.

For years he had checked the old-school BBS bulletin board religiously, not
only every day, but as many days as their dubious power supply would allow,
occasionally for longer. It was the one part of the internet that seemed
*live*, like a patch of saplings pushing through the concrete in a ruined city.

There was activity elsewhere, of course, but if the BBS was a pocket of life,
that was more like a malignant cancer. Everything else that happened consisted
of speed runs to take down formerly maintained sites of the highest possible
stature in (usually) the funniest possible way, or sometimes to replace them
with messages about Jesus or anarchy. He still remembered when the NASA site
had been replaced with a rambling sermon calling climate change punishment for
the world's sins. It had been simple enough to remove that lunatic message, but
getting the NASA site back up would never, ever be possible. Not remotely,
anyway. The same thing was happening to Wikipedia, but in pieces. Articles
revised endlessly, un-revised by people who had cloned a particular page
locally, repeat; and then a whole section would go down because someone had
fucked up trying to do something bigger.

But the BBS was hosted by the Resilant Networks Administration directly, and
nobody hacked RNA. Partly because they couldn't, but mostly because connecting
to RNA's sattelite network was the only way to connect. 

...



