Chad stepped outside and knew before the screen door closed that he would need a
new word for the morning. Matte and thick, the red hardly varied as it got
further from the dull sun it emerged from. As though the light were more resilient
somehow, or maybe dead on arrival. He looked down at the notebook.

*monday 9.30 - see 8.20
Tuesday 10.1 - cheap lipstick
wednesday 10.2 - ugly banana
thursday 10.3 - stanley's 'Tuesday' tie*

He looked back through September, August. "Third degree rugburn" was close, but
this was denser, less alive. He wrote, quickly, *friday 10.4 late soviet*, shut
the cover, went inside.

The water for coffee was boiling over the little cook stove. He turned the
flame down and tried to remember when he stopped guessing light wavelengths in
his book of mornings. When *612 nm* became *congressman's spray-on tan*. It was
when Rachel started asking who he was recording it for, he thought. But no, it
was when she stopped asking, wasn't it. In the ersatz kitchen his morning grew
into itself, from red into a saturated yellow, through the spectrum that felt
at once produced and accidental. 

<br>

It was the Week of the Rain Catchers. That was what they called it when the hue
of their water became red and grainy like dregs from a martian well, and they
remembered---*Hey, yeah, the rain catchers*. At the end of the week of rain
catchers they got around to fixing them, and thus ended the ritual.

Rachel's soft-brimmed hat poked above the frontmost row of sheet metal, widely
corrugated. She was carefully scraping some of the red dust into a plastic
container, to analyze later as best she could. They were really her baby, and
one of the many means by which she had kept the three of them going, but the
work happened on her terms, not the terms of their need. Tom was hammering the
last of the thin aluminum into the same corrugations, grunting and annoyed. His
thick arms made the aluminum ring. He liked it, he wouldn't let Chad or Rachel
help the with the corrugating. But he liked nothing so much as wordless
complaints, so every Week of the Rain Catchers Tom's short beard would bristle
with perspiration and refused offers of help.

Chad glanced nervously at the annotated plans and back to the maze of PVC
piping in front of him. The piping was chaos. Back down at the plans. The plans
were chaos. Downloaded from Wikipedia's remnants two years ago and printed on
the back of a tax form, they had the wavy translucency of something recently
soggy. 

The page's title was "DIY Rain Catchers" and would definitely not have been
left up when Wikipedia was still being maintained. But once the pedants who ran
the place found better things to do, it returned to the Wild West that it was
at its beginning. That meant that articles like this started to crop up, which
in all probability had saved a life or two. It also meant that most of what was
useful had since dissolved. Even their printout had a pointilist portrait of a
penis dropped into the "references" section, which nobody had bothered to
remove. Chad turned the page to consult Rachel's meticulous addenda.  

"Chad!" 

He turned. Rachel.

"What's going on?" She looked concerned under her floppy hat. 

"Nothing." 

"You know what you're supposed to be doing?"

He looked back down at the plans. "Not really. I can't remember where the open
spot is." 

Rachel blinked and put down her container of rust scrapings. "Well, so what's the
only place you see wide enough to fit the catcher and with enough height
relative to the barrels?"

Tom looked around again. They were up a slight, broad hill from the small,
two-story house the three of them shared, off to his right. Rain
catchers crowded the space in front of him, the greenhouses walled him in
behind. Beyond the rain catchers the hill dropped off. A few trees made
plaintive starts for the clouds, and beyond that, the valley and its many
ex-houses, stripped of what made them shelter, lined the single street of
what used to be Pequot.

Turning his survey back to the row of catchers, Chad saw the one mud-slick
patch that was visible through the shantytown of corrugated sheeting.

"Right. Got it, Rach'." 

Rachel nodded and went back to her rust. Chad trudged through mud toward more
mud.

<br>

When Chad woke up that first day of the Week of the Rain Catchers, he did so
with a sense of clarity that had become unusual. His mind had been wandering
for most of the previous year, he felt, as though it were a profligate son from
a wealthy family who, having failed to produce any other prospects for himself,
decided to scoot around to every nearby city where he knew anybody at all---if
not to find success there, then at least to be less conspicuous in failure.
Which, Chad thought, turning his own metaphor over in his hands, would make him
a kind of distressed uncle, taking a solicitous interest in the boy. As though
his own psyche were a shit version of a Henry James novel.

There it went again. He sat up in bed and looked around the cramped, narrow
room for his glasses. Red sun tinted the bedsheet he used for a curtain and the
room it guarded. The glasses could be anywhere. Carefully he stood up and
picked through the detritues of de- and reconstructed computers, wired together
almost as a single organism, its organs linked together in configurations he
hardly remembered the purpose of and therefore dared not touch. From underneath
a tangled AC Power cable, one wayward arm of his glasses poked out, waving at
him. 

He put them on, and although they were dirty, the sense of clarity remained.


