---
title: Hate Speech and the Protection of Online Activists
date: March 26, 2015
---

Since the beginning of \#GamerGate in 2014, threats to online feminist activists and their allies have been routine, as have bomb threats and public shaming on Twitter and beyond. Legislators are scrambling to respond: just this month, Representative Katherine Clark called to strengthen the parts of the Violence Against Women Act that protect victims of online stalking and harassment. Measures such as these are obviously necessary, but several fundamental questions remain unasked about the language under consideration: How does online hate speech differ from previous forms of hate speech? Will the legal structures that define threatening and criminally harassing language as civil rights violations be able to keep up with the linguistic petri dish of social media? How closely do these definitions describe the type of harassment that is actually occurring, and are there any ways in which it is deficient?

This project will attempt to answer these questions by performing content and language analysis on a large corpus of tweets using the \#GamerGate tag. The vast majority of the existing work on \#GamerGate has been network analysis, and while it is unquestionably useful for any social media topic, network analyses ignore linguistic content and thus are not useful in asking whether and how these tweets operate as hate speech. To address this question will require several distinct modes of comparison: close-reading of existing legislation and an historical overview of criminal harassment in hate crime prosecution; corpus analysis of current and historical tweet content; and comparison of this corpus analysis with recognized records of hate speech and criminal harassment. Simply put, the goal of the project will be to provide quantitative support to existing scholarship on online hate crimes, both to make it more useful to policy makers and to demonstrate the extent of the problem.

This research could have a considerable impact on policy decisions because of the amount of available data and the renewed focus on protecting online civil liberties.The crimes in question, by their nature, are easily accessible, and samples from the past several years have been retained as datasets for prior research. (New data can be easily gathered using Twitter's API.) The results of this research can readily be put to use in recent initiatives to buttress legislation like President Obama's Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 (VAWA), which specifically strengthens the government's ability to protect victims of *online* harassment, and The Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Act of 2009. This legislation is likely to be revisited again in the wake of \#Gamergate due to the efforts of legislators like Representative Katherine Clark and others. With the aid of this research, a more powerful case could be made and more precise protections could be offered to the victims of online attacks.

