---
geometry: margin=1in
---

Early in Kim Stanley Robinson's *New York 2140*, Franklin Garr [ anecdote
establishing liquidity]. Later, this "liquidity"-based economy symbolically and
actually begins to break. Just as Charlotte [] convinces her "Ex Fed"---the chairman
of the Fed and, coincidentally, her ex-husband---to nationalize the banks
should another 2008-like crisis occur---an occurrence that she also happens to
be plotting---the frozen East River begins resoundingly to crack, as the latest
winter defined by extreme cold and polar vortexes gives way to a watery spring.

At the center of Robinson's novel is this dual liquidity, the financial
liquidity Franklin depends on and the omnipresence of actual *liquid* in
a future New York flooded to fifty feet above current the sea level. (For
context, Sandy flooded to nearly fourteen feet at its highest point.) As with
most of his work, the speculative *place* is as much character as setting. It
is joined by ten other protagonists and interlocutors, whom we follow in
chapters devoted to their thread of the story---eight or nine chapters in each
of the eight parts, each chapter labeled with the name of the character or
characters it follows. These characters navigate the double liquidity crisis,
finding ways to live in flooded New York icons like the Met Life Building,
where they all live, as Chelsea falls into the sea. As they search for
financial engineers who go missing after an errant spurt of hacktivism, the
protagonists find themselves at the center of a movement to rescue democracy
itself---and with it, the building where they all live---from the deleterious
effects of finance capital. To figure out how to live in a place defined by
actual liquid, in other words, they have to push back against the market's
liquidation of everything it touches. 

That finance capital and climate change become linked in this novel should come
as no surprise to anyone familiar with Robinson's work, nor indeed to most
people who think critically about either topic. As Franklin himself puts it:
"Am I saying that the floods, the worst catastrophe in human history,
equivalent or greater to the twentieth century's wars in their devastation,
were actually good for capitalism? Yes, I am." (118) The technological
centerpiece of this novel is not a faster-than-light drive or a way to send
messages to other galaxies; it is a financial index, the Intertidal Property
Pricing Index (IPPI), which Franklin invents to track the value of flooded
properties as well as the possible value of insurance compensation that
property represents. Robinson shows us the intrigue of betting on this index
("High-frequency geofinance, the greatest game!" [19]) with the same intensity
with which he approaches eking out a living in a flooded metropolis, and they
offer two distinct faces of the same future. The financiers' reckless
speculation on fossil fuels will immiserate everyone not in on the game, he
tells us, and they will keep speculating just as recklessly on the ruins they
leave in their wake.

But this characterization cuts a far more pessimistic figure than Robinson's
novel does, taken as a whole. In practice, the two types of liquidity lead to
distinct futures. On one hand, financial liquidity stands in for the tendency
that, under capitalism, "All that is solid melts into air" (as Marx puts it and
Robinson quotes [496]), doing considerable violence to those left over if, for
example, they were the solid thing melted or if the melting itself emits too
much carbon. As for the actual liquid of flooding, while it enacts a violence
more literal and direct than what finance does, it also creates an alternative
economic system that resists the dematerializing tendencies of trade. Although
Franklin's IPPI index measures the value of property in the intertidal zone,
any flooded or intertidal properties are of dubious legal standing as property,
meaning that flooding lower Manhattan has turned some of the world's most
coveted real estate immediately into a commons. This commons comes to represent
the "real economy" of needs and use-value that works so hard---but ultimately
fails---to turn into "futures," and thus "air" (or liquid). The transition of
the world economy is encapsulated in its spokesperson Franklin's personal
journey from speculation to investment in new intertidal building methods,
a familiar but effective scheme to humanize the economy for more than just its
victims.

For all its many subplots---and they are indeed many, not all satisfactorily
resolved but all working to evoke some aspect of the world Robinson
builds---the novel's narrative motivation can be seen as the contest between
these economies, defined by exchange-value and use-value. The fight to save the
Met from hostile financial takeover has to take place on both fronts, the
material and the pointedly immaterial, which exist in dialectical relation to
one another. Finding and plugging leaks---which threaten the solidity of the
building with liquidity---becomes necessary to shore up the tenant vote to
reject the speculators' bids. Eventually nothing short of plugging the system
itself will do. A visitor asks Charlotte, "So to save your co-op from
a takeover you would destroy the entire global economic system?" Charlotte
responds, succinctly: "Yes." As for what happens next, Robinson put it best at
a book release event at The Strand in March: "You're my readers, so you know
what I'm going to do next. I'm going to start a revolution." 

Encapsulating both the flood and the nature of finance capitalism in the term
liquidity is more than just clever, and it is more than just political. It is
representative of the novel's larger strategy to represent two processes that
are notoriously hard to make visible, the workings of finance and climate
change. Robinson's approach is to represent climate change and finance not one
at a time, but simultaneously. Doing so makes both more perceptible, as though
they are two near-transparent filters that become darker when overlaid. Bets on
the IPPI quantify the destruction sea-level rise could cause, while the
reformulated economic geography of New York, in which wealth and height above
sea level correspond directly, neatly visualizes finance's role in increasing
income inequality. Similarly, the geological history of New York and the
history of lackluster responses to financial crises become part of the same
deep history informing the plot. Using one invisibility to underscore another
is a resoundingly successful approach, no matter how counterintuitive. 

If the overlapping systems of climate change and finance become starkly visible
by the end of the novel, it is in large part due to the formal conceit of the
novel. The characters who switch off providing a narrative focus also provide
different windows on the world of 2140, both in terms of the space they have
access to and their interpretations of what they find there. Franklin Garr's
financial perspective is buttressed by vastly differing ones: Mutt and Jeff...
