{\rtf1\ansi\deff3\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f5\fmodern\fprq1\fcharset128 Courier New;}{\f6\fnil\fprq0\fcharset128 StarSymbol{\*\falt Arial Unicode MS};}{\f7\fnil\fprq2\fcharset128 Lucida Sans Unicode;}{\f8\fnil\fprq2\fcharset128 Tahoma;}{\f9\fnil\fprq0\fcharset128 Tahoma;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue128;\red128\green128\blue128;}
{\stylesheet{\s0\snext0\nowidctlpar{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\aspalpha\ltrpar\cf0\kerning1\hich\af7\langfe255\dbch\af8\afs24\lang255\loch\f3\fs24\lang1033 Default;}
{\s1\sbasedon28\snext29\ilvl0\outlinelevel0\sb240\sa120\keepn\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs32\ab\loch\f4\fs32 Heading 1;}
{\s2\sbasedon28\snext29\ilvl1\outlinelevel1\sb240\sa120\keepn\i\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs28\ai\ab\loch\f4\fs28 Heading 2;}
{\s3\sbasedon28\snext29\ilvl2\outlinelevel2\sb240\sa120\keepn\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs28\ab\loch\f4\fs28 Heading 3;}
{\s4\sbasedon28\snext29\ilvl3\outlinelevel3\sb240\sa120\keepn\i\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs23\ai\ab\loch\f4\fs23 Heading 4;}
{\s5\sbasedon28\snext29\ilvl4\outlinelevel4\sb240\sa120\keepn\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs23\ab\loch\f4\fs23 Heading 5;}
{\s6\sbasedon28\snext29\ilvl5\outlinelevel5\sb240\sa120\keepn\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs21\ab\loch\f4\fs21 Heading 6;}
{\*\cs15\snext15 Numbering Symbols;}
{\*\cs16\snext16\hich\af6\dbch\af6\afs18\loch\f6\fs18 Bullets;}
{\*\cs17\snext17\i\ai Emphasis;}
{\*\cs18\snext18\b\ab Strong Emphasis;}
{\*\cs19\snext19\strike Strikeout;}
{\*\cs20\snext20{\*\updnprop5801}\up10 Superscript;}
{\*\cs21\snext21{\*\updnprop5801}\dn10 Subscript;}
{\*\cs22\snext22\i\ai Quotation;}
{\*\cs23\snext23\hich\af5\dbch\af5\loch\f5 Teletype;}
{\*\cs24\snext24\cf2\ul\ulc0 Internet Link;}
{\*\cs25\snext25 Footnote Characters;}
{\*\cs26\snext26{\*\updnprop5801}\up10 Footnote anchor;}
{\*\cs27\snext27 Definition;}
{\s28\sbasedon0\snext29\sb240\sa120\keepn\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs28\loch\f4\fs28 Heading;}
{\s29\sbasedon0\snext29\sb86\sa86 Text body;}
{\s30\sbasedon29\snext30\sb86\sa86\dbch\af9 List;}
{\s31\sbasedon0\snext31\sb120\sa120\noline\i\dbch\af9\afs24\ai\fs24 Caption;}
{\s32\sbasedon0\snext32\noline\dbch\af9 Index;}
{\s33\sbasedon0\snext33\li567\ri567\lin567\rin567\fi0\sb144\sa144 Quotations;}
{\s34\sbasedon0\snext34\sb0\sa0\hich\af5\dbch\af5\afs20\loch\f5\fs20 Preformatted Text;}
{\s35\sbasedon0\snext36\sb86\sa86 Definition Term;}
{\s36\sbasedon0\snext29\li720\ri0\lin720\rin0\fi0\sb0\sa0 Definition Definition;}
{\s37\sbasedon0\snext37\li43\ri43\lin43\rin43\fi0\sb0\sa0\noline Table Contents;}
{\s38\sbasedon37\snext38\ql\li43\ri43\lin43\rin43\fi0\sb0\sa0\noline\b\ab Table Heading;}
{\s39\sbasedon0\snext39\li283\ri0\lin283\rin0\fi-283\sb0\sa0\noline\afs20\fs20 Footnote;}
{\s40\sbasedon0\snext40\tqc\tx4680\tqr\tx9360\noline Footer;}
{\s41\sbasedon0\snext42\sb115\sa115 Definition Term Tight;}
{\s42\sbasedon0\snext42\li720\ri0\lin720\rin0\fi0\sb0\sa0 Definition Definition Tight;}
{\s43\sbasedon0\snext29\i Date;}
{\s44\sbasedon0\snext43\i Author;}
{\s45\sbasedon0\snext29\sb0\sa283\brdrb\brdrdb\brdrw15\brdrcf3\brsp0{\*\brdrb\brdlncol3\brdlnin1\brdlnout1\brdlndist20}\brsp0\noline\afs12\fs12 Horizontal Line;}
{\s46\sbasedon0\snext29 First paragraph;}
{\s47\sbasedon28\snext48\qc\sb240\sa120\keepn\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs36\ab\loch\f4\fs36 Title;}
{\s48\sbasedon28\snext29\qc\sb240\sa120\keepn\i\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs28\ai\loch\f4\fs28 Subtitle;}
{\s49\sbasedon0\snext49\tqc\tx4680\tqr\tx9360\noline Header;}
}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}
{\listlevel\levelnfc0\leveljc0\levelstartat1\levelfollow0{\leveltext \'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi0\li0}\listid1}
}{\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}{\info{\title Melville Darwin}{\creatim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}{\revtim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}{\printim\yr2013\mo12\dy2\hr14\min20}{\comment OpenOffice}{\vern4010}}\deftab709

{\*\pgdsctbl
{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse195\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1999\headery1440\margbsxn2016\footery1440{\header\pard\plain \s40\tqc\tx4680\tqr\tx9360\noline\qr{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Polefrone }{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
{\field{\*\fldinst  PAGE }{\fldrslt 11}}}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }
\par }{\footer\pard\plain \s40\tqc\tx4680\tqr\tx9360\noline\qc{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
}
\par }\pgdscnxt0 Default;}}
\formshade\paperh15840\paperw12240\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\sectd\sbknone\sectunlocked1\pgndec\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1999\headery1440\margbsxn2016\footery1440{\header\pard\plain \s40\tqc\tx4680\tqr\tx9360\noline\qr{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Polefrone }{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
{\field{\*\fldinst  PAGE }{\fldrslt 11}}}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }
\par }{\footer\pard\plain \s40\tqc\tx4680\tqr\tx9360\noline\qc{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
}
\par }\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
\pgndec\pard\plain \s47\qc\sb240\sa120\keepn\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs36\ab\loch\f4\fs36{\listtext\pard\plain  \tab}\ls1 \li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\tx0\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb240\sa120{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Melville Darwin}
\par \pard\plain \s44\i{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Phillip R. Polefrone}
\par \pard\plain \s43\i{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
23 November 2013}
\par \pard\plain \s1\ilvl0\outlinelevel0\sb240\sa120\keepn\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs32\ab\loch\f4\fs32{\listtext\pard\plain  \tab}\ls1 \li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\tx0\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Darwin}
\par \pard\plain \s46{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
[More general/framing introduction to the Darwin half]}
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
In }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
The}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Voyage}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
of}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
the}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
\uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9c\uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Beagle}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
\uc3 \u8221\'e2\'80\'9d\uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
,}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 observation and classification merge: Darwin\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s record of having seen a creature is often rendered in terms already mediated by taxonomy and scientific precedence. When Darwin introduces the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9clizards\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d of the Galapagos, for example, he does not begin with description. Instead, he begins with the relational structure of a set of observations he has not yet reported: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cOf lizards there are four or five species; two probably belong to the South American genus Leiocephalus, and two to Amblyrhyncus. This remarkable genus was characterized by Mr Bell, from a stuffed specimen sent from Mexico\u8230\'e2\'80\'a6\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d(279). Though he begins with the vernacular \u8220\'e2\'80\'9clizards\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and continues to characterize his own observations, the sentence is not allowed to end until his observations have been contextualized within the annals of knowledge that already exists, or which has already been determined. Nor is this his final level of classification. Having placed his own observation within the body of inherited knowledge, he continues to classify that classification itself within the larger body of taxonomic knowledge, providing a citation to Bell. This structure is unsurprising, a feature of diligent scientific writing\u8212\'e2\'80\'94the young Darwin, having never published, wants to make sure his writing meets the standards of the discipline. What is more surprising, however, is that the same recourse to classification characterizes his notes: his written observations are being mediated by his predecessors at the earliest stages. The first mention of one such lizard in the Galapagos notes proper (excluding \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cAmblyrhyncus\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d in the front flap, which appears to be a post-hoc description of contents) is \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cViviparous Lizard near Leposoma of Spix\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (\uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Notebooks}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 430, 8A). Again, Darwin begins with observation and vernacular naming, only to quickly mediate it with taxonomic placement and citation[^2]. This description may be a characterization of scientific process and by no means unique to Darwin, but Darwin imports the structure of classification into a more general account, even into the syntax of his loosely scientific narrative. In so doing, he reveals the extent to which classification is barely posterior to observation\uc3 \u8212\'e2\'80\'94and may even be anterior to it.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
In a sense, this very anteriority of knowledge, this commitment to contribute to what has already been established, defined the expedition itself. Robert FitzRoy, the expedition\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s captain, was careful to outfit the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cBeagle\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d with the tools necessary for observation, including chronometers, surveying devices, and other expensive instrumentation. This equipage was meant merely to allow for observation, but the choice of instruments was also already determining the character of observation to a considerable extent\u8212\'e2\'80\'94as Janet Browne and Michael Neve point out, the chronometers, \u8220\'e2\'80\'9c\uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
when}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
calibrated}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
against}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
those}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
held}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
at}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Greenwich}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
, would enable him to determine the ship\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s longitude far more accurately than had previously been attempted\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (4, emphasis mine). Without a contextualizing system such as the reference to Greenwich time, instrumentation is useless. Accuracy is a factor not only of the fine gradations of measurement, but the relation of those measurements to every measurement preceding it. The conditions for preparation are already determining the type of observation that will be able to be made. As a kind of human instrumentation, Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s own calibration comes in the form of his education. When he cites \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cMr Bell\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d immediately after logging an observation, he is placing what he has seen in the context of his own experience as a student as well as in the context of the naturalists before him. Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s willingness to contextualize and temper what he has seen with what others before him have seen even determined his selection for the trip: when FitzRoy writes to the Admiralty of the British Navy in 1831 asking for a fitting scientific companion, Darwin is recommended because of his success in the professional and social structures of Cambridge (Browne and Neve 5). He is chosen for his ability in precisely this type of replication of knowledge.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Darwin\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s thinking about collection, taxonomy, and the relationship of the individual to the species also has a corollary in the way that he makes comparisons: as he uses it, comparison is a prelude to classification, but it is also restricted by the existing taxonomic hierarchy. In their study on the role of behavioral observations in the development of evolutionary theory, Arist\uc2 \u243\'c3\'b3bulo P\u233\'c3\'a9rez, Germ\u225\'c3\'a1n Guti\u233\'c3\'a9rrez, and Alejandro Segura classify Darwin\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s observations within their own taxonomic system, pointing out that 11% of Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s observations are rendered as comparisons. They specify the type of comparisons that occur: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cel uso de la comparaci\uc2 \u243\'c3\'b3n tanto de las estructuras anat\u243\'c3\'b3micas como de sus funciones, le permite a Darwin dar cuenta de los procesos evolutivos en las especies\uc3 \u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (P\uc2 \u233\'c3\'a9rez et al. 514).[^4.1] That these comparisons occur on the anatomical and functional level reveals their purpose. By perceptually and textually dissecting the creatures of the Galapagos, Darwin is able to draw lines of association among entries in a taxonomy based on physical and behavioral similarity, lines that situate an entry with relation to those contiguous to it.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
To make such piecemeal comparisons, though, requires a certain kind of observation; the process of dissection, as with classification, begins on the level of perception. Description, which characterizes 51% of Darwin\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s observations (Per\uc2 \u233\'c3\'a9z et al. 513), is often just a prelude to the taxonomizing comparison. To return to the Amblyrhyncus genus: \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cIn size perhaps they are a little inferior to the latter, but several of them weighed between 10 and 15 pounds each. The colour of their belly, front legs, and head (excepting the crown which is nearly white), is a dirty yellowish-orange: the back is a brownish-red, which in the younger specimens is darker\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (282). Two dissections occur: of the animal, which is separated into parts and parts of parts; and of the observations, which are separated into type by what is being recorded (size, weight, color). The two dissections allow for comparison, but descriptively they break the Amblyrhyncus into pieces. The organic creature becomes a collection of disparate observations, separated, classified, and set aside for later analysis; but the perceptual act, the subjective apprehension of a living being, is likewise divided in the name of objective description.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
The word \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9ccollection\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d is used deliberately here, for Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s love of \uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
collecting}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 as a means of and predecessor to understanding is well documented; moreover, the logic of the collection is useful as a description of the }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Voyage}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 project and its epistemological situation. As a child, Darwin had a marked and unusually diligent love of collecting natural specimens, which continued well into the time of his \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cBeagle\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d voyage (Rosenberg 85). His role as a collector as well as a natural historian proceeded to such a degree that Robert McCormick, the expedition\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s senior naturalist in charge of the expedition\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s official collection, left the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cBeagle\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d at its first port, outraged by the presence of a competing collector (Browne and Neve 11). That Darwin was collecting as well as cataloguing is significant insofar as it provides a lens through which to see his sense of his own project: a collection is a reorganization, and representation in miniature, of the ecological environment from which it is pulled.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Considering the }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Voyage}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 as a linked set of collections in itself also explains certain acts of organization\uc3 \u8212\'e2\'80\'94and reorganization\u8212\'e2\'80\'94that occur in the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cGalapagos Archipelago\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d chapter. Both structurally and in specific instances, Darwin shows his hand in organizing his observations according to a logic internal to his project; this logic is reconcilable with the antecedent body of natural history that informs his observations, but it is not entirely identifiable with it. In presenting the beaks of finches, for example, his own organization as a collector comes into conflict with a more scientific and taxonomic organization. At first, he points out that \u8220\'e2\'80\'9ca nearly perfect gradation may be traced, from a beak extraordinarily thick, to one so fine, that it may be compared to that of a warbler\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (287). Soon after, however, his own organization of specimens as a collector gives way to a structure more consistent with taxonomic hierarchy: >I very much suspect, that certain members of the series are confined to different islands; therefore, if the collection had been made on any \uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
one}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 island, it would not have presented so perfect a gradation. It is clear, that if several islands have each their peculiar species of the same genera, when these are placed together, they will have a wide range of character. But there is not space in this work, to enter on this curious subject. (288)}
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
This is one of the most important passages of the \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cGalapagos Archipelago\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d chapter of the \uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Voyage}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 from a scientific perspective, as it raises the questions of transmutation of species that would later form the foundation for his theory of evolution, but the passage also exhibits a conflict between two different kinds of organization. The first, hypothetical one is structured according to the set of possible relationships to be drawn among the specimens. But this structure, and the organizing act that precedes it, is rejected in favor}
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Tension between the genres of travelogue, diary, and work of natural history leads to a conflicted and amorphous structure of the chapter. The early part of the chapter is marked by dated entries, which gives the sense if not of a narrative than at least of a chronology. Passages of scientific description and anecdote mingle, placing emphasis on Darwin as an observer situated in time and place. In what is ostensibly still the October 3rd entry, though, this chronological frame gives way to the purely taxonomic, describing time and place but somehow hovering above and outside of it. Where paragraphs in the section had previously begun with phrases like \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cDuring another day\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cDuring the greater part of our week,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d an pronouncement that Darwin \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cwill now offer a few general observations on the natural history of these islands\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d initiates a new structure according taxonomic categories (from family to order down to species)(273-4). Paragraphs now begin: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cOf mammalia\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (275); \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cI will first describe the habits of the tortoise\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (276); \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cTo conclude with the order of reptiles\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (285). By merging structures, Darwin also merges types of record; the personal, the anecdotal, the experimental, and the taxonomic become different entries in a textual, archipelagic collection. Darwin himself becomes a part of the collection.[^4.2] **[What about the beaks? The gradient thing is important]\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
This treatment of the individual organism with relation to its species becomes clearer when considered in the context of the antecedent theories of Jean Baptiste Lamarck and Georges Cuvier,[^5] the hegemonic theories explaining the transmutation of species prior to Darwin, which Darwin reacts against in the observations of his }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Voyage}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
. There is no evidence to suggest that Darwin fully accepted Lamarck\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s or Cuvier\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s theories\u8212\'e2\'80\'94in fact, it is more probable that he generally rejected them in adherence to Charles Lyell refutation in his \uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Principles}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
of}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Geology}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
, a book that influenced Darwin greatly (Chancellor and Van Wyhe 38). Nevertheless, Darwin\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s rare gestures toward explanation or theorization implicitly endorse a relationship between hereditary traits and environment, which defines Lamarck\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s and Cuvier\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s contributions. Unlike Lamarck\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s and Cuvier\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s theories, however, the relationship Darwin posits of a species to its environment does not affect physical inheritance; instead, Darwin is focused almost entirely on behavioral adaptation and species learning. Concluding a passage in which he experimentally teases a lizard, driving it to a shore\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s edge to prove its fear of water and finally throwing it into a pond, Darwin says the hydrophobia under pressure is \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cprobably urged by a fixed and hereditary instinct that the shore is its place of safety,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d since \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cthis reptile has no enemy whatever on shore\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (281). At issue in this explanation is the question of how behavioral characteristics emerge. This is a major preoccupation of Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s stay on the archipelago, prompting him to pull tails, knock on shells, and commit other acts of minor experimental violence. In pondering the lizard, Darwin is unwilling to suggest an explanation of the individual behavior. Instead, he turns immediately to an explanation on the level of species. He concludes the Galapagos chapter with another such explanation, this time rendered as the beginning of a more general theory: >From the foregoing statements we may, I think, conclude that the >wildness of birds with regard to man\u8230\'e2\'80\'a6is not acquired by them in a >short time, even when much persecuted; but that in the course of >successive generations it becomes hereditary. With domesticated animals >we are accustomed to see instincts becoming hereditary; but with those >in a state of nature, it is more rare to discover instances of such an >acquired knowledge.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
The emphasis on the time necessary for such changes to occur may point to Darwin\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s debt to Lyell,[^6] but any other assertions of influence here are more difficult to sustain. Though he seems to have learned to focus on environmental factors from Lamarck and Cuvier, his focus on behavior departs from their theories. Moreover, the way he discusses environment with relation to inheritance leads to a tension between knowledge acquired by the individual and inherited from antecedents. The difference between \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cdomesticated\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d animals and those \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cin a state of nature\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d would appear to be learned behaviors in response to environment. Syntactically, though, Darwin equates \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cinstincts becoming hereditary\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cacquired knowledge\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d on the level of the species. The implicit argument, then, seems to be that an individual of a species learns a certain behavioral trait and passes it on to its progeny by an act of teaching; this act repeated over an enormous length of time \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cbecomes hereditary.\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d Without a physical corollary to the act of acquiring knowledge\u8212\'e2\'80\'94and if he rejects Lamarck and Cuvier, no physical corollary yet exists\u8212\'e2\'80\'94no other explanation of species-level learning makes sense. In not-quite-theorizing the way that behaviors become biologically inscribed on successive generations, Darwin identifies the theoretical gap that he will eventually come to fill.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
In lieu of a theory of physical transmutation, Darwin focuses on the development of communal knowledge on the level of the species\uc3 \u8212\'e2\'80\'94which he understands biologically as instinct. His experiments test the limits of two bodies of knowledge: scientific knowledge (the act of classification) and animal knowledge (the act of survival). Observation comes to establish, then, not only the place of the species in the natural historian\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s taxonomy, but also the state of the collective knowledge of the non-human species; the knowledge structures of the collector and the collection overlap. Teaching and learning as processes of communal development define both Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s sense of himself as a young scientist and his first gestures toward an evolutionary theory. In both cases, the individual is defined in relation to the larger group\u8212\'e2\'80\'94whether as a contributor to a communal body of knowledge or as an entry in a vast taxonomy. The \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cGalapagos Archipelago\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d chapter of \uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
The}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Voyage}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
of}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
the}{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
 }{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
\uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9c\uc1 }{\i\ai\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Beagle}{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
\uc3 \u8221\'e2\'80\'9d is a new scientist\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s struggle to come to terms with the relationship of the individual to the species, the entry to the collection, the self to the community, and the theory to the preceding body of knowledge. These categories bleed into each other for Darwin, culminating in an essentially social inference that carves out the theoretical space where Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s eventual legacy will develop.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s1\ilvl0\outlinelevel0\sb240\sa120\keepn\b\hich\af7\dbch\af8\afs32\ab\loch\f4\fs32{\listtext\pard\plain  \tab}\ls1 \li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\tx0\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Melville}
\par \pard\plain \s46{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
If Darwin compulsively renders his developing self with respect to the body of scientific knowledge that precedes him\uc3 \u8212\'e2\'80\'94whether by deferring his classification, by allowing his perception to be mediated by the perceptions of his predecessors, or by relentlessly understanding himself as a student, only registering explanation and theorization in the most tentative terms\u8212\'e2\'80\'94then Herman Melville, writing on the same islands in a very similar moment, can only be said to radically abnegate all such bodies of knowledge. Where Darwin places himself within a framework, Melville destroys the framework. What Darwin takes as a foundation, Melville takes as an at best epistemologically suspicious set of totalizing statements. And what Darwin takes as a social frame\u8212\'e2\'80\'94the academy, career, and even identity as human\u8212\'e2\'80\'94Melville understands as the residue domination, an attempt to shackle the self with having already understood. Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s account of the Galapagos begins with a radical display of not-knowing, which has been well documented,[^6] but it quickly moves into the conditions necessary for knowledge and the phenomenal experience of encountering anterior bodies of knowledge\u8212\'e2\'80\'94a world in which classification conquers, in which every encountered thing is subject to the inhibition of understanding by another epistemological agent, subject to constitution by another discourse. Finally, he presents naming and the assertion of knowledge as acts of conquering that prevent the existence of other, fully constituted selves, linking epistemological mastery with personal domination.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
In \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cThe Alternative Taxonomies of Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s \u8216\'e2\'80\'98The Encantadas,\u8217\'e2\'80\'99\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d Denise Tanyol also compares Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s and Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s opposed treatments of the Galapagos, arguing that Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s destabilization of taxonomy is a way of reclaiming for the islands their unknowability and thereby thwarting the basically imperial motivations of Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s survey. In the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cRock Rodondo\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d sketch, she argues, Melville resists taxonomic classification in two steps, first disputing valuation according to position in a hierarchy and then disrupting the act of classification by which such hierarchies are constructed (259-60). He continues to create \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cnew, imaginative approaches to the task of classification,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and in so doing \u8220\'e2\'80\'9creveal[s] the subjectivity\u8212\'e2\'80\'94and ultimately the self-interest\u8212\'e2\'80\'94underlying any ostensibly objective scientific system of classification\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (262-3). Drawing on Michel Imbert and Carolyn Karcher, she reads Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s rejection of taxonomic classification as a warning against the imperialism inherent in such projects, and concludes by situating Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s de- and reconstruction of the naturalist\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s taxonomy as a broadside aimed at empire itself (264-5, 278-9). Comparing the ways that such classifications and reclassifications affect the observer instead of the observed, though, reveals the extent to which observation and classification of something external is also always a construction of the self in Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cEncantadas.\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d The inherent subjectivity of classification, then, does more than undermine the classification. Subjective classification for Melville becomes an act of dual-rendering of the observer and the observed, each according to terms established by the other. Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s encounters with previously established systems of naming and hierarchy are thus encounters with the imprints of other minds\u8212\'e2\'80\'94imprints that, unless disputed, prevent new self-construction through unalloyed seeing and naming. Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s dissent runs deeper than in Tanyol\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s representation of it, is more ontological than political: by sweeping away the scientific rendering of the Galapagos, Melville asserts a right to individual experience unmediated by previous experiences of it. To encounter an environment already rendered, already understood and classified, is to encounter a self already pre-constructed and thus enslaved.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Two ways of seeing and classifying distinctly separate Melville\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s account of life on the Galapagos from Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s. The first is the way that Melville uses comparisons. As shown above, Darwin uses comparisons in order to put individual observations in the context of a larger taxonomic hierarchy. The act of observation that precedes classification is already influenced by the classifying act, and seeing for Darwin becomes an anatomical dissection structured to allow for that hierarchical placement. In stark contrast, Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s comparisons seem willfully to cross the least porous lines of the naturalist\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s taxonomy as well as less scientific systems of classification. Non-human is compared to human, animal to vegetable, inorganic to organic matter. Tortoises are subject to perhaps the most and widest-ranging comparisons, being as they are the focus of the early sketches. Though many other features and inhabitants of the Gallapagos are subject to similar comparison, each type of Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s cross-taxonomic comparisons can be found in passages on the tortoises. In one moment they are \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cgrim as blacksmiths,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d only to become mounts for Brahmin in the same paragraph (303). Their shells are considered independently of the rest of their bodies in an act of perceptual dissection that seems at first reminiscent of Darwin; where Darwin might proceed from this dissection to use the shell as a key for taxonomic placement, though, Melville drastically resituates the shell in a context of trans-species protection and ancientness, associating it with medieval human history by calling it \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cliving mail\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and \u8220\'e2\'80\'9ca citadel\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (301). The same processes that Darwin uses for placement, Melville uses for displacement. In a particularly audacious moment, he even invokes scientific discourse to describe his radical declassification: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9c[as I beheld] scars strangely widened, swollen, half obliterate, and yet distorted like those sometimes found in the bark of very hoary trees, I seemed an antiquary of a geologist, studying the bird-tracks and ciphers upon the exhumed slates trod by incredible creatures whose very ghosts are now defunct\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (301). Scars that at first exhibit the features of animal matter (becoming \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cswollen\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d) become a means of linking them to \u8220\'e2\'80\'9choary trees,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d until suddenly Melville is a \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cgeologist\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d looking for fossils. In one sweeping sentence, tortoises are transformed from animal to vegetable to mineral, becoming understandable not just in different taxonomic kingdoms, but also different branches of science. The boundlessness of the creatures becomes such that even the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cantiquary geologist\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d finds them \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cincredible\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and is only able to discuss them in such supernatural a context as their \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cghosts.\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s comparisons acknowledge the taxonomic hierarchies, but they only do so as a means of violating them with greater specificity.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
The second way that Melville\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s representation of life forms differs from Darwin\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s is his emphasis on multiple possible (and valid) perspectives. Darwin uses the habitual present tense, as I argue above, to relate observations of individual organisms to its species as a whole; in doing so, he also privileges a single perspective (his) by implicitly making it representative of all possible observations of a specimen of the species. In Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s Rock Rodondo section (\u8220\'e2\'80\'9cSketch Third\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d) and elsewhere, though, individual observations from different perspectives indicate different things even about a single specimen, and none of them is clearly presented as correct\u8212\'e2\'80\'94the rock only appears to be a rock when one is standing on it, but elsewhere it appears to be \u8220\'e2\'80\'9csome Spanish Admiral\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s ship\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d or is reminiscent of a \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cBell Tower of St.\~ Mark\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (305).[^7] Taking Rock Rodondo as in part a physicalization of taxonomy itself\u8212\'e2\'80\'94it is stratified, supporting, containing, and framing different gradations of species, even if subversively as Tanyol suggests\u8212\'e2\'80\'94Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s comment about the ephemerality of form is applied directly to systems of classification. Even when describing the mutable hierarchy of species from his narrator\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s position on the rock, Melville is careful to emphasize the perspectival contingency of his observations. Moments of classificatory pronouncement are interrupted by passages of chaos and motion in which the observer is emphasized. As the avian portion of the Rock Rodondo taxonomy departs the classifying structure, entering the undifferentiated mass above, the narrator is situated with a grammatical subject \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cI\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d. Verbs of perception which are somewhat rare up to this point appear in a cluster\u8212\'e2\'80\'94\u8220\'e2\'80\'9chear,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cgaze,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cbehold\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d appear in two contiguous sentences\u8212\'e2\'80\'94which marks a synesthetic blending of observations: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cclear, silver, bugle-like notes unbrokenly [fall], like oblique lines of swift-slanting rain in a cascading shower\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (311). Even categories of perception are mutable depending on the perspective assumed.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
What is true of literal, physical perspective with respect to Rock Rodondo is also true of epistemological perspective and the beliefs of the observer. The belief of some mariners in magical enchantment is faithfully related as a predecessor to other (albeit corrupted) forms of discourse\uc3 \u8212\'e2\'80\'94and, perhaps because it does not seem as necessary, enchantment is the explanation faced with the least representational subversion. Unlike Darwin, who contradicts the Galapagos residents\u8217\'e2\'80\'99 complaints of poverty with his own observations about their conditions,[^8] Melville privileges all statements of knowledge by endorsing none and presenting each as flawed and contingent. The explanation for this catholic approval of perspectives is presented in a submerged theory of what constitutes knowledge, and more particularly how knowledge is constituted, which begins \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cSketch Fourth\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d: > If you seek to ascend Rock Rodondo, take the following prescription. Go three voyages round the world as a main-royal-man of the tallest frigate that floats; then serve a year or two apprenticeship to the guides who conduct strangers up the Peak of Teneriffe; and as many more respectively to a rope-dancer, an Indian juggler, and a chamois. This done, come and be rewarded by the view from our tower. How we get there, we alone know. If we sought to tell others, what the wiser were they? Suffice it, that here at the summit you and I stand.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Melville\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s narrator Tarnmoor provides a \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cprescription\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d specific enough that it can be taken to be his personal history. To \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cascend Rock Rodondo,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d then\u8212\'e2\'80\'94that is, to see exactly what Melville has seen and reported, as it has already been shown to be a mutable construct\u8212\'e2\'80\'94is only possible if you have done everything that Tarnmoor has done and, presumably, become Tarnmoor thereby. By denying \u8220\'e2\'80\'9ctell[ing]\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d as a means of attaining wisdom, Tarnmoor implicitly excludes teaching as a means of learning. What is seen is a product of the observer, the observer is formed by what that observer knows, and what is known is a product exclusively of experience. Seeing, being, and knowing all become bound in Tarnmoor\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s definition of self. In Melville\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s rendering of classification, the way of seeing becomes a unique and untransferable thing, rendering any deference to anterior bodies of knowledge impossible without a fundamental transformation of the self.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Such transformation\uc3 \u8212\'e2\'80\'94of the self, but also of the thing seen\u8212\'e2\'80\'94define the ways of seeing that Tarnmoor posits and enacts. Seeing and being seen lead to dual transmutation and simultaneous constitution of subject and object: not only does what is seen seem literally to change under the gaze of the observer, but the observer too is redefined by the act of seeing, through the process of experience that Tarnmoor identifies as the link between seeing, knowing, and being. A relationship of mirroring and imprinting is established early in \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cSketch First\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d: >\u8220\'e2\'80\'9cAnd as for solitariness; the great forests of the north, the expanses of unnavigated waters, the Greenland ice-fields, are the profoundest of solitudes to a human observer; still the magic of their changeable tides and seasons mitigates their terror; because, though unvisited by men, those forests are visited by May; the remotest seas reflect familiar stars even as Lake Erie does; and in the clear air of a fine Polar day, the irradiated, azure ice shows beautifully as malachite\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (288-9).\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Attributes more accurately ascribed to the human observer become ascribed to features of the landscape. The \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9csolitariness\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d referred to by way of introduction is not rendered as a product of the observer\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s distance from other people. Rather, it becomes associated with the thing seen, even to the point of redefining them as themselves \u8220\'e2\'80\'9csolitudes\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d\u8212\'e2\'80\'94what is perceived as an attribute becomes the substance itself. An immediate parallel is offered in the act of reflection. Just as the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cunnavigated waters\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cthe Greenland ice-fields\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d are redefined by the solitariness of the observer, so is the unfamiliar reflective surface redefined by what it reflects, \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cMay.\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d But what finally redefines them is not May itself, but the familiarity of May and its ability to transform the barren landscapes it touches. This receptive landscape forms at once a parallel and counterpoint to the islands, modeling the act of reflection while demonstrating the familiarity and comfort the islands lack. The islands, by contrast, seem \u8220\'e2\'80\'9c[a]pples of Sodom, after touching\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d\u8212\'e2\'80\'94ruined by the mere act of interaction, destroyed by apprehension.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
The reflection analogy would seem to imply that the object reverts to its natural state as soon as it is released from the gaze of the observer\uc3 \u8212\'e2\'80\'94but this does not seem to be the case in Tarnmoor\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s rendering of perceptual transformation. Like the apple of Sodom, once transformed, the perceived object stays transformed. The frequent recourse to enchantment as an explanation here becomes definitional: the implied enchanter exercises its will upon a creature or thing and changes its identity forever. Elsewhere, the mere act of association is shown to be enough for permanently transformation, and not only in the eyes of the original observer. Tarnmoor says of human ruins: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9clike all else which has but once been associated with humanity, they still awaken in us some thoughts of sympathy, however sad\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (288). This sympathetic association with humanity is not limited to those things whose origin is human, either. Later, it is applied to the tortoises. The moment of Tarnmoor\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s greatest sympathy with the tortoises culminates with their being \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cassociated with humanity\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cSuch worshipful venerableness of aspect! \u8230\'e2\'80\'a6I no more saw three tortoises. They expanded\u8212\'e2\'80\'94became transfigured. I seemed to see three Roman Coliseums in magnificent decay\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (300). Association gives way to transformation; the attribute becomes the substance. Elsewhere tortoises are literally inscribed with associations: Tarnmoore describes \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cthe ghost of a gigantic tortoise, with \u8217\'e2\'80\'99Memento *****\u8217\'e2\'80\'99 burning in live letters upon his back" (296). The inscription becomes a material thing without quite giving up its liveness as an extension of a human. Perceptions are not content to remain in the mind of the observer. Enchantment becomes an operative mode in every perceptive act in \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cThe Encantadas.\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d Encounters with things previously unseen lead to simultaneous transformation, but encounters with those things encountered before are encounters with the effects of previous observers\u8212\'e2\'80\'94whether in the form of things \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cbut once associated with humanity\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d or islands named after explorers. The \u8220\'e2\'80\'9csolitude\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d of the frozen plains in the reflection analogy above, then, is not just a product of the distance of those plains from civilization. It arises from the waters being \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cunnavigated,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d having never been encountered, never imprinted with the traces of another mind. Via negativa, Melville invokes the presence of predecessors in an encounter with everything previously seen: all things are marked, stamped, or otherwise transformed with the vestiges of another mind.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Marked, stamped, imprinted\uc3 \u8212\'e2\'80\'94if the acts of perceiving, naming, or understanding are acts of dual creation of self and other, a certain amount of authorship is implicit. In claiming that such natural and inevitable acts as perception and thought are authorial, Tarnmoor situates authorship as a fundamental part of personal experience, and asserts perceptual ownership and concomitant self-authorship as natural rights. In \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cSketch Eighth,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d Hunilla, the widow so problematically described as a \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cCholo\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and \u8220\'e2\'80\'9chalf-breed,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d is presented as the author of the experiences by which she is defined as \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cthe heroine of her tale\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d\u8212\'e2\'80\'94and in her reverential narrative treatment, almost the heroine of \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cThe Encantadas.\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d In the narration of the event that defines her, Hunilla\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s perspectival situation is repetitively emphasized, as is the rendering of image and memory. When her husband and brother sink, the narrative proper is concluded with \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cboth adventurers perished before Hunilla\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s eyes,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d only to be chiasmatically repeated in the beginning of the next paragraph: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cBefore Hunilla\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s eyes they sank\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (353). Through the rest of the paragraph terms of perception dominate, echoing the earlier passage in \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cRock Rodondo\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d but with an unmistakable emphasis of a single perspective. This perspective is both bounded and aestheticized by Hunilla\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s own actions as she watches, entranced: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cHunilla had withdrawn the branches to one side, and held them so. They formed an oval frame, through which the bluely boundless sea rolled like a painted one. And there, the invisible painter painted to her view the wave-tossed and disjointed raft, its once level logs slantingly upheaved, as raking masts, and the four struggling arms undistinguishable among them\u8230\'e2\'80\'a6. Death in a silent picture; a dream of the eye; such vanishing shapes as the mirage shows\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (353-4). The image is again indeterminate, defined by misperception of \u8220\'e2\'80\'9craking masts\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d in a further echo of the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cRock Rodondo\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d section. But this time misperception is a feature of authorship. Though the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cinvisible painter paint[s]\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d the scene, and not Hunilla, Hunilla is the one who creates the frame that allows the invisible painting to occur. Perception is an act devoid of agency, but it is nevertheless an act of creation. What was previously presented as multiple perspectives contingent on misperception\u8212\'e2\'80\'94the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cdream of the eye,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d the product of \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cmirage\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d\u8212\'e2\'80\'94are now indicative of personal creation. Later, she bounds her experience in her own terms, marking time in a way that defies all previous systems (Tanyol ###). In Hunilla\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s case, these moments of rendering are the only definition she is allowed. Her race is from the beginning both defining and hopelessly ambiguous: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9ccholo\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d establishes an indeterminacy that allows her to become associated with the dogs she keeps via \u8220\'e2\'80\'9chalf-breed.\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d The entire identity Melville affords her arises from this one experience, the rendering of which she herself is the author. In a very real and very narrative sense, then, she is the author of herself, and this self-authorship begins with perceptual rendering.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Consistent with the implicit connection of self-construction and perception, Melville\uc3 \u8217\'e2\'80\'99s representation of slavery begins with an act of competing classifications, linking such classification of others with domination of them. Oberlus\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s subjugation of other creatures is represented as a struggle to establish dominance of classification and representation. \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cThe long habit of sole dominion over every object round him\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d engenders in Oberlus \u8220\'e2\'80\'9ca vast idea of his own importance, together with a pure animal sort of scorn for all the rest of the universe\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (378): in Oberlus\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s world, everything he sees is a part of his dominion, which he takes as an organizing taxonomy of his own\u8212\'e2\'80\'94everything that exists is subjugated to him. His is a simple hierarchy, yet hierarchy it is. Nevertheless, Oberlus\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s personal taxonomy requires proving; but in order to prove it, he needs to prove his conception of himself, \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cto prove his potency upon the first specimen of humanity which should fall unbefriended into his hands\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (379). In this case, the classification of all other creatures begins with a conception of self, not only of self as master but of self as somehow taxonomically other than all else\u8212\'e2\'80\'94Oberlus distinguishes himself from the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cspecimen[s] of humanity\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d which he hopes to conquer. When he finally has his chance to prove his hierarchical view of the universe, it occurs through dialectical means. Though his domination is enforced by physical means (a \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cblunderbuss,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d or a kind of musket), it is initiated and refuted through competitive classification. [Can I get Hegel in here??] When, after the abortive first attempt, he succeeds in enforcing his domination by treating his slaves \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cas creatures of an inferior race,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d the power of definition resides with him. He is free to classify them as he will, and he \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cgaffles his four animals animals, and makes murderers of them; out of cowards fitly manufacturing bravos\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (384). This is only allowed to happen, however, because they submit to Oberlus\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s taxonomy: \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cfinding themselves entirely dependent upon Oberlus\u8230\'e2\'80\'a6they willingly enlist under him, becoming his humble slaves, and Oberlus the most incredible of tyrants\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (383). In the Oberlus parable, domination begins with willful submission to a taxonomy\u8212\'e2\'80\'94whether biological or political, as it is both in the case of Oberlus\u8212\'e2\'80\'94in which one is inferior to another being. Personal domination begins with a willingness to submit to other explanations about the state of the physical world, as in forfeiting one\u8217\'e2\'80\'99s own right to determine perception as such, one foregoes the right to self-determination. To submit to another set of explanations is, in the end, just to submit.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
Whether the Oberlus parable is taken as a warning or a natural result of epistemological obeisance, it is representative of the way Melville treats perception and classification throughout \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cThe Encantadas,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d and contextualizes his resistance to the submission that Darwin as a young scientist willingly makes to his scientific predecessors. To Melville, perception becomes constitutive of the self, and thus to forfeit the right of perceptual determination is to forfeit the right to self-construction. Epistemological deference becomes the beginning of submission, and submission becomes the beginning of personal domination. The Encantadas as Melville writes them are a site of regained personal mastery, with all the dangers that come with it. Though this power by no means provides relief from suffering\u8212\'e2\'80\'94in many cases it seems even to deepen it\u8212\'e2\'80\'94it is a reclamation of that power in a world that to Melville appears always already determined. Life on a ship \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cdissolve[s]\u8230\'e2\'80\'a6the whole moral man\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d (384); life on the mainland is seen only in an instance of imprisonment. What is for Darwin a place to apply and expand antecedent bodies of knowledge is for Melville a place to escape them. And what is for Darwin a way to establish himself within those systems is for Melville an opportunity to refuse them.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
seeing people}
\par \pard\plain \s29\sb86\sa86\sb86\sa86{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
As for the other side of the mirror, the observer: when dealing with non-human creatures and things the transformation of the observer is effected by mood, memory, and range of associations, all of which are altered by each thing perceived and alter in turn future acts of perception. In \uc3 \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cTwo Sides to a Tortoise,\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d the \u8220\'e2\'80\'9cSketch Second\u8221\'e2\'80\'9d section,\uc1 }
\par }