---
title: Melville Darwin
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
date: 23 November 2013
csl: mla.csl
...

In the last days of 1840, Herman Melville, twenty-one years old, fleeing a few minor debts and the malaise of a job as a scrivener, departed on the *Acushnet* from Fairhaven, Massachussetts to begin his first whaling voyage. He had been at sea the year before and found himself unable not to return---upon reading Richard Henry Dana's *Two Years Before the Mast* (1840), which may have helped to compel the voyage, he felt "tied & welded" to Dana's seafaring narrative "by a sort of Siamese link of affectionate sympathy" (Parker 1: 181-8). Melville thus set out to collect the images that would provide fodder for much of his career as a writer---including the distinctly fallen world, the volcanic masses, and the hissing tortoises of "The Encantadas." 

Not all of Melville's predecessors were literary, however. At the same moment that Dana, at nineteen, was making the voyage on the *Alert* that would fuel *Two Years Before the Mast*, Charles Darwin was undertaking his own initiation as a seafaring naturalist on the *Beagle* at twenty-two---as Allan C. Christensen points, the two young, unknown voyagers would unknowingly cross paths in 1834 and 1836 (243). By the time Melville reached the Galapagos on October 30th, 1841, Darwin's first encounter with the archipelago had been in print for two years under the title *Journal and Remarks, 1831-1836*, but he would not encounter it until 1844 in the library of the *United States* (Christensen 247, Parker 267 v.1). He would seek it out again, though, in preparation for *Mardi* in 1847---some seven years before the publication of "The Encantadas"---drawing on the observations from a voyage in some ways not dissimilar from his own.

However many similarities their voyages may have had, the only point of discursive contact between Melville and Darwin comes with reference to the Galapagos Archipelago. In their treatments of the islands they could hardly be more distinct, particularly in their relationships to anterior bodies of knowledge. Darwin's constant reference to the scientific knowledge that has formed him causes his representations of life to mirror the structure of taxonomic classification, down to the minute levels of syntax, rhetoric, and even observation itself.[^f] For Darwin, knowledge comes from perceptual dissection of both the observation and the thing observed, which causes them to adhere to the structure of data required by natural history.[^a] This way of seeing and classifying according to external systems also influences his understanding of self-construction, and his pre-evolutionary understanding of the transmutation of species mirrors his own understanding of knowledge as communal and his view of the individual as only part of a larger whole. To Melville, epistemological authority becomes identified with domination. In "The Encantadas," subjective perception is dually constitutive of both the observer and the thing observed---seeing and understanding become authorial acts, claims to ownership but also inscriptions of the self on every encountered thing. To classify another creature thus becomes tantamount to asserting dominion over it; furthermore, accepting a pre-formulated system of understanding in Melville's eyes is submission to the dominion of others. Melville's concept of identity in "The Encantadas" is coextensive with individual epistemological frameworks, and yielding to scientific context becomes a renunciation of the part of identity that arises from experience and seeing. The reference to epistemological authority that is the context for Darwin's constitution as a scientist and a writer is the very thing that Melville presents as the barrier to self-determination.

#~

At twenty-two, Darwin's collecting was already controversial. The senior naturalist, Robert McCormick, resigned at the first port of call either out of envy for Darwin's precocity or rage over the presence of collection that would compete with his own (Berra 20, Browne and Neve 11). As a collector as well as a fledgling scientist is perhaps how best to understand the young Darwin at the moment he sets foot on the Galapagos, notebook in hand. The tension that marks collecting of how to organize data---whether to proceed by an individual act of ordering that relates only to one's specimens or treat the collection as a microcosmic sampling indicative of a larger scientific corpus---defines Darwin's first contribution to science. In a passage on the beaks of finches that would later be of great significance to his legacy, Darwin addresses this tension directly, noting that "a nearly perfect gradation may be traced, from a beak extraordinarily thick, to one so fine, that it may be compared to that of a warbler," only to turn a skeptical eye on his own line of relation in deference to taxonomic logic, noting with a hint of regret that "if the collection had been made on any *one* island, it would not have presented so perfect a gradation" (287-8). This tendency to rewrite initial apprehension of life on the Galapagos according to the requirements of natural history recurs throughout the "Galapagos Archipelago" chapter of Darwin's *Voyage of the "Beagle"*, and the course Darwin charts between these systems of organization comes to define him as a thinker and a person. Reference to an inherited epistemological framework determines Darwin's account at every level, from perception of specimens to his construction of himself, and his self-construction and classification become inflected with the same logic.


Observation and classification are often indistinguishable in Darwin's early writing: his record of having seen a creature is often rendered in terms already mediated by taxonomy and scientific precedence. When Darwin introduces the "lizards" of the Galapagos, for example, he does not begin with description. Instead, he begins with the relational structure of a set of observations he has not yet reported: "Of lizards there are four or five species; two probably belong to the South American genus Leiocephalus, and two to Amblyrhyncus. This remarkable genus was characterized by Mr Bell, from a stuffed specimen sent from Mexico..." (279). He begins with the vernacular "lizards" and continues to characterize his own observations, but the sentence is not allowed to end until his observations have been contextualized by knowledge that already exists. Nor is this his final level of classification. Having placed his own observation within the body of inherited knowledge, he continues to classify that classification itself within the larger body of scientific production, providing a citation to Bell.[^d] Scientific precedence replaces the grammatical and subjective "I," and Darwin is lost through his own deference.

This structure is unsurprising, a feature of diligent scientific writing---the young Darwin, having never published, wants to make sure his writing meets the standards of the discipline---but what is more surprising is that the same recourse to classification characterizes his notes: his written observations are being mediated by existing context at the earliest stages. The first mention in the Galapagos notes proper of the lizards cited above is "Viviparous Lizard near Leposoma of Spix" (*Notebooks* 430, 8A). Again, Darwin begins with observation and vernacular naming, only to quickly mediate it with taxonomic placement and citation[^2]. This description may be a characterization of scientific process (and thus by no means unique to Darwin), but Darwin imports the structure of classification into a more general account, even into the syntax of his loosely scientific narrative. In doing so, he reveals the extent to which classification is barely posterior to observation---and is even in many cases anterior to it. Near-constant reference to the body of scientific knowledge in which he had steeped himself as a student at Cambridge is, if not interfering with fundamental representation, then determining its character at a very early stage of perception.

In a sense, this very anteriority of knowledge, a commitment to contribute to what has already been established, defined the expedition itself in both its aims and methods. Robert FitzRoy, the "Beagle's" captain, was careful to outfit the ship with the tools necessary for observation, including chronometers, surveying devices, and other expensive instrumentation (Berra 14).[^b] This equipage was meant merely to allow for observation, but the choice of instruments was also already determining the character of observation---as Janet Browne and Michael Neve point out, for example, the chronometers, "*when calibrated against those held at Greenwich*, would enable him to determine the ship's longitude far more accurately than had previously been attempted" (4, my emphasis). Without a contextualizing system such as the reference to Greenwich time, instrumentation is useless. Accuracy here is a factor not only of the fine gradations of measurement, but the relation of those measurements to every measurement preceding it, and in service of this accuracy the conditions for preparation are already determining the type of observation that will be able to be made. As a kind of human instrumentation (at least in the eyes of FitzRoy), Darwin's own calibration comes in the form of his education. When he cites "Mr Bell" immediately after logging an observation, he is placing what he has seen in the context of his own experience as a student, but also in the context established by the naturalists before him. Darwin's willingness to render what he has seen in terms of what others before him have seen even determined his selection for the trip: when FitzRoy wrote to the Admiralty of the British Navy in 1831 asking for a "gentleman-naturalist who would be a suitable traveling companion," Darwin was recommended because of his success in the professional and social structures of Cambridge, a university which as an educational institution and research entity was dedicated to contributing to collective bodies of knowledge (Berra 14, Browne and Neve 5). He is chosen for his success in precisely this type of collective structure and because the observations he will make can be expected to be structured as well.

Because of the need to adhere to structured scientific knowledge, Darwin's comparisons and descriptions occur in parallel with the taxonomic framework---both being limited by it and reinforcing it at the same time.[^4.1] His comparisons are based mostly on anatomical and functional observations, which reveals their purpose: by perceptually and textually dissecting the creatures of the Galapagos, Darwin is able to draw lines of association among entries in a taxonomy based on physical and behavioral similarity, lines that situate every entry with relation to those contiguous to it. The observations that reinforce taxonomy also include description, though: description allows for his classifying comparison by performing a kind of perceptual dissection into anatomical facets. Description[^4.2] is the vehicle by which Darwin primes his observed specimens for taxonomic relation. To return to the  Amblyrhyncus genus: "In size perhaps they are a little inferior to the latter, but several of them weighed between 10 and 15 pounds each. The colour of their belly, front legs, and head (excepting the crown which is nearly white), is a dirty yellowish-orange: the back is a brownish-red, which in the younger specimens is darker" (282). Two dissections occur here: of the animal, which is separated into parts and parts of parts; and of the observations, which are separated into type by what is being recorded (size, weight, color). Dissection allows for comparison, but descriptively it breaks the Amblyrhyncus into pieces. The unified creature becomes a collection of disparate observations, separated, classified, and set aside for later analysis; but the perceptual act, the subjective apprehension of a living being, is likewise divided in the name of objective description.

As the limb is separated form the animal, so the specimen is from the species. The observational practices above, which are necessary concomitants of contribution to the larger body of scientific knowledge, presumes and enforces an elision of the individual in the collective. The *structure* of knowledge about the animal life of the Galapagos comes to inflect its contents: just as Darwin understands his own observations in relation to the larger naturalist project, he considers individual creatures with the assumption that his observations indicate fixed characteristics of the species. The assumption is probably justifiable in all non-human cases,[^3] but the way it expresses itself in *Voyage* reveals the connection between, on one hand, scientific knowledge and Darwin's representation, and on the other, the epistemological framework he is working within. Darwin's frequent use of the habitual present tense, for example, provides a syntactic corollary for his practices of observation. At various points and with reference to various species, he says: "[t]he female [tortoise] never uses her voice, and the male only at [certain] times" (278); "[w]hen in the water the animal swims with perfect ease and quickness" (280); "[w]hen the tortoise arrives at the spring...it buries its head in the water above its eyes, and greedily swallows great mouthfuls" (277). Instances in which interpretation or a high degree of specificity are paired with the habitual present tense, such as "greedily" and "above its eyes" in the last example above, are often humorous in the way zeugma is often humorous---a usage convention that applies to one context (in this case the individual) is placed in a context in which it does not apply or applies differently (in this case the species). Similarly rendered observations are also made about the human population of the Galapagos, though, which quickly becomes problematic: "[t]he inhabitants, although complaining of poverty, gain, without much trouble, the means of subsistence from the fertile soil" (271); or, from the notebooks, "Anarchical state / black flag --- Robbers Vive la patria off with your Jacket"[^3.1] (432-433). In both of these latter cases the habitual present elides human individuality in already homogenizing social observations. Besides prefiguring some later, regrettable applications of his work in facets of social Darwinism, Darwin's willingness here to derive collective meaning from individual data reveals the basis of his classifying, collecting, and recording.

But Darwin's self-contextualization with respect to his predecessors does not mean blind adherence---the moment he breaks with them is when he lays the groundwork for the theory that will define him. His pre-evolutionary revision of those theories, though, unformed though it still is, is based on adaptation by communal learning; the placeholder for his theory of evolution mirrors his own understanding of knowledge production in the scientific field.  There is no evidence to suggest that Darwin accepted the hegemonic theories of transmutation[^5] at the time of the *Voyage*: it is more probable that he generally rejected them in adherence to Charles Lyell refutation in his *Principles of Geology*, a work that influenced Darwin greatly (Chancellor and Van Wyhe 38). Nevertheless, Darwin's gestures toward explanation or theorization, rare though they are, implicitly endorse a relationship between hereditary traits and environment, which defines Jean Baptiste Lamarck's and Georges Cuvier's contributions in particular. 

Unlike Lamarck's and Cuvier's theories, however, the relationship Darwin posits of a species to its environment does not affect physical inheritance; he instead focuses almost entirely on behavioral adaptation and species learning. Concluding a passage in which he experimentally teases a lizard, driving it to a shore's edge to prove its fear of water and finally throwing it into a pond, Darwin says the hydrophobia under pressure is "probably urged by a fixed and hereditary instinct that the shore is its place of safety," since "this reptile has no enemy whatever on shore" (281). At issue in this explanation is the question of how behavioral characteristics emerge: we might now explain it with natural selection, but that is not yet available to Darwin, as he has not yet written it. This implicit question becomes a major preoccupation of Darwin's stay on the archipelago, prompting him to pull tails, knock on shells, and commit other acts of minor experimental violence. He concludes the Galapagos chapter with another such explanation, this time rendered as the beginning of a more general theory: 

>From the foregoing statements we may, I think, conclude that the wildness of birds with regard to man...is not acquired by them in a short time, even when much persecuted; but that in the course of successive generations it becomes hereditary. With domesticated animals we are accustomed to see instincts becoming hereditary; but with those in a state of nature, it is more rare to discover instances of such an acquired knowledge. (290)

The emphasis on the time necessary for such changes to occur may point to Darwin's debt to Lyell's "gradualism,"[^6] but any other assertions of influence here are difficult to sustain. Though he seems to have learned to consider environmental factors from Lamarck and Cuvier, his focus on animal knowledge and behavior (and not the physiological results of behavior, as in Lamarck) departs from their theories. Moreover, the way he discusses environment with relation to *inheritance* leads to a tension between knowledge acquired by the individual and inherited from its antecedents. The difference between "domesticated" animals and those "in a state of nature" would appear to stem from behaviors learned in response to environment. Syntactically, though, Darwin equates "instincts becoming hereditary" and "such…acquired knowledge" on the level of the species. The implicit argument seems to be that an individual of a species learns a certain behavioral trait and passes it on to its progeny by an act of teaching; this act repeated over an enormous length of time in Darwin's rendering "becomes hereditary." Without a physical corollary to the act of acquiring knowledge---and if he rejects Lamarck and Cuvier, no physical corollary yet exists---no other explanation of species-level learning makes sense. In not-quite-theorizing the way that behaviors become biologically inscribed on successive generations, Darwin identifies the theoretical gap that he will eventually come to fill. In the meantime, however, his explanation is based on the kind of knowledge transmission, always with respect to the knowledge that precedes him, that he himself engaged in.

In lieu of a theory of physical transmutation, Darwin focuses on the development of communal knowledge on the level of the species---which he understands biologically as instinct. His experiments test the limits of two bodies of knowledge, both scientific knowledge (the act of classification) and animal knowledge (the act of survival). Darwin's observations come to establish, then, not only the place of the species in the natural historian's taxonomy, but also the state of the collective knowledge of the non-human species; the knowledge structures of the collector and the collection overlap. Teaching and learning as processes of communal development define both Darwin's sense of himself as a young scientist and his first gestures toward an evolutionary theory. In both cases, the individual is defined in relation to the larger group---whether as a contributor to a communal body of knowledge or as an entry in a vast taxonomy. The "Galapagos Archipelago" chapter of *The Voyage of the "Beagle"* is a new scientist's struggle to come to terms with the relationship of the individual to the species, the entry to the collection, and the theory to the preceding body of knowledge. These categories bleed into each other for Darwin, culminating in an essentially social inference that carves out the theoretical space where his eventual legacy will develop. But in all these versions of the realization, the anterior body of knowledge is primary. Nothing exists, or is allowed to be represented, without its place in the existing hierarchy.

#~

If Darwin compulsively renders his developing self with respect to the scientists who precede him---whether by deferring his classification, by allowing his perception to be mediated by the perceptions of his predecessors, or by relentlessly understanding himself as a student and only registering theorization in the most tentative terms---then Herman Melville, writing on the same islands in a very similar moment, can only be said to radically abnegate all such bodies of knowledge. It is known that Melville had a copy of *The Voyage of the "Beagle"* when he was writing "The Encantadas," though whether and to what extent he read it has not been conclusively determined. His only citation of sources consists of whalers, buccaneers, and navy captains, in addition to a wider reference to "barren, bootless allusions from some few passing voyagers or compilers" (128 OUP ed). Among those voyagers and compilers he seems to include Darwin and the whole body of natural history to which his observations were indebted. Though specific response to Darwin's *Voyage* can only be called probable, Melville's treatment of the Galapagos Archipelago is deeply invested in questions of taxonomy, and more specifically the epistemological authority claimed by those who establish taxonomy.

Though writing on largely the same topics, places, and creatures, the two accounts could hardly be less similar. Where Darwin places himself within a framework determined by scientific precedence, Melville destroys any structures of knowledge that prevent or contradict individual perception mediated by experience. What Darwin takes as a foundation, Melville takes as, at best, an epistemologically suspicious set of totalizing statements. And what Darwin takes as a social frame---the academy, career, even human identity---Melville understands as the residue of domination, an attempt to shackle the self with having already been understood. Melville's account of the Galapagos begins with a destabilizing display of not-knowing, but it continues to narrate a process of seeing without and against taxonomic context---experience replaces science as a mediating agent. Finally, he presents naming and the assertion of knowledge as acts of conquering that prevent the existence of other, fully constituted selves, linking epistemological mastery with personal domination.


In "The Alternative Taxonomies of Melville's 'The Encantadas,'" Denise Tanyol also compares Darwin's and Melville's opposed treatments of the Galapagos, arguing that Melville's destabilization of taxonomy is a way of reclaiming for the islands their unknowability, thereby thwarting the basically imperial motivations underlying Darwin's survey. In the "Rock Rodondo" sketch, she argues, Melville resists taxonomic classification in two steps, first disputing valuation according to position in a hierarchy and then disrupting the act of classification by which such hierarchies are constructed (259-60). He continues to create "new, imaginative approaches to the task of classification," and in so doing "reveal[s] the subjectivity---and ultimately the self-interest---underlying any ostensibly objective scientific system of classification" (262-3). Drawing on Michel Imbert and Carolyn Karcher, she reads Melville's rejection of taxonomic classification as a warning against the imperialism inherent in such projects, and concludes by situating Melville's de- and reconstruction of the naturalist's taxonomy as a broadside aimed at empire itself (264-5, 278-9). Comparing the ways that such classifications and reclassifications affect the *observer* as well as the observed, though, reveals the extent to which observation and classification of something external is also always a construction of the self in Melville's "Encantadas." In contrast, this paper argues that the inherent subjectivity of classification does more than undermine the classification: subjective classification for Melville becomes an act of dual-rendering of the observer and the observed, each according to terms established by the other. Melville's encounters with previously established systems of naming and hierarchy are thus encounters with the imprints of other minds---imprints that, unless disputed, prevent new self-construction through unalloyed seeing and naming. Melville's dissent runs deeper than in Tanyol's representation of it. It is as ontological as it is political: by sweeping away the scientific rendering of the Galapagos, Melville asserts a right to individual experience unmediated by previous understanding---and in Melville's hands, unmediated understanding is constitutive of individual being. But it is also as much about self-construction as it is construction of the perceived object, as in Tanyol's reading. To encounter an environment already rendered, already understood and classified, is to encounter a self already pre-constructed and thus enslaved.

Two ways of seeing and classifying distinctly separate Melville's account of life on the Galapagos from Darwin's. The first is the way that Melville uses comparisons. As shown above, Darwin uses comparisons in order to put individual observations in the context of a larger taxonomic hierarchy. The act of observation that precedes classification is already influenced by the classifying act, and seeing for Darwin becomes an anatomical dissection structured to allow for that hierarchical placement. In stark contrast, Melville's comparisons seem willfully to cross even the least porous lines of the naturalist's taxonomy as well as less scientific systems of classification. Non-human is compared to human, animal to vegetable, inorganic to organic matter. Tortoises are subject to perhaps the most and widest-ranging comparisons, being as they are the focus of the early sketches. Though many other features and inhabitants of the Gallapagos are subject to similar comparison, each type of Melville's cross-taxonomic comparisons can be found in passages on the tortoises. In one moment they are "grim as blacksmiths," only to become mounts for Brahmin in the same paragraph (303). Their shells are considered independently of the rest of their bodies in an act of perceptual dissection that seems at first reminiscent of Darwin, but where Darwin might use the shell as a key for taxonomic placement, Melville drastically resituates the shell in a context of trans-species protection and ancientness, associating it with medieval human history by calling it "living mail" and "a citadel" (301). The same processes that Darwin uses for placement, Melville uses for displacement. In a particularly audacious moment, he even invokes scientific discourse to describe his radical declassification: "[as I beheld] scars strangely widened, swollen, half obliterate, and yet distorted like those sometimes found in the bark of very hoary trees, I seemed an antiquary of a geologist, studying the bird-tracks and ciphers upon the exhumed slates trod by incredible creatures whose very ghosts are now defunct" (301). Scars that at first exhibit the features of animal matter (becoming "swollen") become a means of linking them to "hoary trees." Then, suddenly, Melville is a "geologist" looking at inorganic "slates." In one sweeping sentence, tortoises are transformed from animal to vegetable to mineral, becoming understandable not just within different taxonomic kingdoms, but also by different branches of science. The boundlessness of the creatures becomes such that even the "antiquary geologist" finds them "incredible" and is only able to discuss so supernatural an aspect as their "ghosts." Melville's comparisons acknowledge the taxonomic hierarchies, but only to place emphasis on their contingency.

The second way that Melville's representation of seeing and understanding differs from Darwin's is his emphasis on multiple perspectives: using comparison and a physicalized taxonomic hierarchy, he presents many perspectives as potentially valid while marking each as subjective and contingent. Darwin uses the habitual present tense, as I argue above, to relate observations of an individual specimen to its species as a whole; in doing so, he also privileges a single perspective (his) by implicitly making it representative of all possible observations of a specimen of that species. In Melville's Rock Rodondo section ("Sketch Third") and elsewhere, though, individual observations from different perspectives indicate different things even about a single specimen, and none of them is clearly presented as correct---the rock only appears to be a rock when one is standing on it, but elsewhere it appears to be "some Spanish Admiral's ship" or is reminiscent of a "Bell Tower of St. Mark" (305).[^7] Taking Rock Rodondo as in part a physicalization of taxonomy itself---it is stratified, supporting, containing, and framing different gradations of species, even if subversively as Tanyol suggests---Melville's comment about the ephemerality of form is applied directly to systems of classification. Even when describing the mutable hierarchy of species from his narrator's position on the rock, Melville is careful to emphasize the perspectival contingency of his observations. Moments of classificatory pronouncement are interrupted by passages of chaos and motion in which the observer is emphasized. As the avian portion of the Rock Rodondo taxonomy departs the classifying structure, entering the undifferentiated mass above, the narrator is situated with a grammatical subject "I". Verbs of perception, which are somewhat rare up to this point appear in a cluster---"hear," "gaze," and "behold" appear in two consecutive sentences---which marks a synesthetic blending of observations: "clear, silver, bugle-like notes unbrokenly [fall], like oblique lines of swift-slanting rain in a cascading shower" (311). Even categories of perception are mutable, it seems, depending on the perspective assumed.

In applying this view of visual perspective to perspective more broadly conceived, Melville presents a theory of knowledge in which experience, understanding, and identity are coextensive. The belief of some mariners in magical enchantment is faithfully related as a predecessor to other (albeit corrupted) forms of discourse---and, perhaps because it does not seem as necessary, enchantment is the explanation faced with the least representational subversion. Unlike Darwin, who contradicts the Galapagos residents' complaints of poverty with his own observations about their conditions,[^8] Melville privileges all statements of knowledge by endorsing none and presenting each as flawed and contingent. The explanation for this catholic approval of perspectives is presented in a submerged theory of what constitutes knowledge, and more particularly how knowledge is constituted, which begins "Sketch Fourth": 

> If you seek to ascend Rock Rodondo, take the following prescription. Go three voyages round the world as a main-royal-man of the tallest frigate that floats; then serve a year or two apprenticeship to the guides who conduct strangers up the Peak of Teneriffe; and as many more respectively to a rope-dancer, an Indian juggler, and a chamois. This done, come and be rewarded by the view from our tower. How we get there, we alone know. If we sought to tell others, what the wiser were they? Suffice it, that here at the summit you and I stand.

Melville's narrator Tarnmoor provides a "prescription" specific enough that it can be taken to be his personal history. To "ascend Rock Rodondo," then---that is, to see exactly what Melville has seen and reported, as it has already been shown to be a mutable construct---is only possible if you have done everything that Tarnmoor has done and, presumably, become Tarnmoor thereby. By denying "tell[ing]" as a means of attaining wisdom, Tarnmoor implicitly excludes teaching as a means of learning. What is seen is a product of the observer, the observer is formed by what that observer knows, and what is known is a product exclusively of experience. Seeing, being, and knowing all become bound in Tarnmoor's definition of self. In this rendering of classification, the way of seeing becomes a unique and untransferable thing, rendering any deference to anterior bodies of knowledge impossible without a fundamental transformation of the self.

Such transformation---of the self, but also of the thing seen---define the type of perception that Tarnmoor posits and enacts. Seeing and being seen lead to dual transmutation and simultaneous constitution of subject and object: not only does what is seen seem literally to change under the gaze of the observer, but the observer too is redefined by the act of seeing. This refining occurs through the process of experience that Tarnmoor identifies as the link between seeing, knowing, and being. Apparently as a model for this dual constitution, a relationship of mirroring and imprinting is introduced early in "Sketch First" in an environmental context: 

>"And as for solitariness; the great forests of the north, the expanses of unnavigated waters, the Greenland ice-fields, are the profoundest of solitudes to a human observer; still the magic of their changeable tides and seasons mitigates their terror; because, though unvisited by men, those forests are visited by May; the remotest seas reflect familiar stars even as Lake Erie does; and in the clear air of a fine Polar day, the irradiated, azure ice shows beautifully as malachite" (288-9). 

Attributes more accurately ascribed to the human observer become features of the landscape. The "solitariness" referred to by way of introduction is not rendered as a product of the observer's distance from other people. Rather, it becomes associated with the thing seen, even to the point of redefining places as themselves "solitudes"---what is perceived as an attribute becomes substance. Reflection is offered as an immediate analogy: just as the "unnavigated waters" and "the Greenland ice-fields" are redefined by the solitariness of the observer, so is the unfamiliar reflective surface redefined by what it reflects, "May." But what finally redefines them is not May itself, but the *familiarity* of May to an observer and its ability to transform the barren landscapes it touches. The physical landscape is changed in reflection of the gaze, not the season. This receptive landscape forms at once a parallel and counterpoint to the islands, modeling the act of reflection while demonstrating the familiarity and comfort the islands lack. The islands, by contrast, seem "[a]pples of Sodom, after touching"---ruined by mere interaction, destroyed by apprehension---the thing observed is altered by observation. 

The reflection analogy might seem to imply that the object reverts to its natural state as soon as it is released from the gaze of the observer---but this is not the case in Tarnmoor's rendering of perceptual transformation: like an "[a]pple of Sodom," once transformed, the perceived object stays transformed, making observation an indelible inscription of self and experience. The frequent recourse to enchantment as an explanation of form here becomes definitional: the implied enchanter exercises its will upon a creature or thing, and changing its identity forever. Elsewhere, association is sufficient for permanent transformation, and not only in the eyes of the original observer. Tarnmoor says of human ruins: "like all else which has *but once* been associated with humanity, they still awaken in us some thoughts of sympathy, however sad" (288, my emphasis). He emphasizes the singularity of the occurrence, and in rendering this effect as relevant to "us"---all of us---he makes the transformation permanent, communicable, and universally apprehensible. 

Sympathetic association with humanity is not limited to things of human origin, either. Later, it is applied to the tortoises. The moment of Tarnmoor's greatest sympathy with the tortoises culminates with their being "associated with humanity": "Such worshipful venerableness of aspect! ...I no more saw three tortoises. They expanded---became transfigured. I seemed to see three Roman Coliseums in magnificent decay" (300). Association gives way to transformation; the attribute again becomes the substance. Elsewhere, tortoises are literally inscribed with Tarnmoor's associations: he describes "the ghost of a gigantic tortoise, with 'Memento \*\*\***' burning in live letters upon his back" (296). The inscription becomes a material thing without quite giving up its liveness, which would seem to derive from being an extension of human thought. Perceptions are not content to remain in the mind of the observer in "The Encantadas." Enchantment becomes an operative mode in every perceptive act, a means by which perceptual dual rendering is physicalized. Encounters with things previously unseen lead to mutual transformation, but encounters with those things seen before become encounters with the minds of previous observers---whether in the form of things "but once associated with humanity" or islands named after explorers, observation breeds inscription. 

The "solitude" of the frozen plains in the reflection analogy above, then, is not just a product of the distance of those plains from civilization. It arises from the waters being "unnavigated," having never been encountered, never imprinted with the traces of another mind. *Via negativa*, Melville invokes the presence of predecessors in every encounter with a thing previously seen: everything marked, stamped, or otherwise imprinted with the vestiges of another mind.

Marked, stamped, imprinted---if the acts of perceiving, naming, and understanding are creation of both self and other, a certain amount of authorship is implicit; in claiming that perception and thought are authorial, Tarnmoor situates authorship as a fundamental part of personhood. In "Sketch Eighth," Hunilla is presented as the author of the experiences by which she is defined. Her perspectival situation is repeatedly emphasized, as is her rendering of image and memory. When her husband and brother drown, the narrative proper is concluded with "both adventurers perished before Hunilla's eyes" only to be chiasmatically repeated in the beginning of the next paragraph: "Before Hunilla's eyes they sank" (353). Through the rest of the paragraph terms of perception dominate, echoing the earlier passage in "Rock Rodondo" but with an unmistakable emphasis of a single perspective. This perspective is both bounded and aestheticized by Hunilla's own actions as she watches, entranced: 

>Hunilla had withdrawn the branches to one side, and held them so. They formed an oval frame, through which the bluely boundless sea rolled like a painted one. And there, the invisible painter painted to her view the wave-tossed and disjointed raft, its once level logs slantingly upheaved, as raking masts, and the four struggling arms undistinguishable among them.... Death in a silent picture; a dream of the eye; such vanishing shapes as the mirage shows. (353-4)

The image is again indeterminate, defined by misperception of "raking masts" in a further echo of the "Rock Rodondo" section. But this time misperception is a feature of authorship. Though the "invisible painter paint[s]" the scene, and not Hunilla, Hunilla is the one who creates the frame that allows the invisible painting to occur. Though the rendering itself is of unclear agent, perception is nevertheless presented as an act of creation. What was previously presented as a product of multiple perspectives contingent on misperception---the "dream of the eye," the product of "mirage"---is now indicative of personal creation. Similarly, as Tanyol points out, she bounds her experience in her own terms, marking time in a way that defies all previous systems (Tanyol 262). In Hunilla's case, these moments of rendering are the only definition she is allowed. Her race is from the beginning both defining and ambiguous: "cholo" establishes an indeterminacy that allows her to become equated with the dogs she keeps, and she is called a "half-breed." The entire identity Melville affords her arises from this one experience, the rendering of which she herself determines. In a very real and very narrative sense, then, she is the author of herself, and this self-authorship begins with perceptual rendering.

In presenting a conflict of such perceptual renderings, Melville shows how deference to other epistemological frameworks can lead to loss of self. Building on the equation of self-construction and perception, Melville begins his representation of slavery with competition of classifications: classification of others becomes domination, and Oberlus's subjugation of other creatures is represented as a struggle to establish dominant representation of them. "The long habit of sole dominion over every object round him" engenders in Oberlus "a vast idea of his own importance, together with a pure animal sort of scorn for all the rest of the universe" (378): in Oberlus's world, everything he sees is a part of his dominion, which he takes as an organizing taxonomy of his own---his is a simple hierarchy, yet hierarchy it is. In order to prove it, he needs to prove his conception of himself, "to prove his potency upon the first specimen of humanity which should fall unbefriended into his hands" (379). In this case, the classification of all other creatures begins with a conception of self, not only of self as master but of self as somehow taxonomically distinct from all others---Oberlus distinguishes himself from the "specimen[s] of humanity" which he hopes to conquer. When he finally has his chance to prove his hierarchical view of the universe, it occurs through dialectical means. Though his domination is enforced by physical power (a "blunderbuss," or a kind of musket), it is initiated and refuted through competitive classification. The Oberlus tale is like Hegel's allegory of the lord and bondsman in its mutual effects on slave and master: Oberlus attains a "consciousness [that] exists for itself" while those he conquers are left with a "consciousness repressed within itself"(qtd. in Gilroy 60); but such consciousnesses are constituted by a taxonomist's logic. When, after the abortive first attempt, he succeeds in enforcing his domination by treating his slaves "as creatures of an inferior race," the power of definition resides with him. He is free to classify them as he will, and he "gaffles his four animals, and makes murderers of them; out of cowards fitly manufacturing bravos" (384). This is only allowed to happen, however, because they submit to Oberlus's taxonomy: "finding themselves entirely dependent upon Oberlus...they willingly enlist under him, becoming his humble slaves, and Oberlus the most incredible of tyrants" (383). In the Oberlus parable, domination begins with willful submission to a taxonomy---whether biological, political, or both as it is in this case---in which the self is inferior to another being.[^c]

Personal domination begins with a willingness to submit to other explanations about the state of the physical world, as in forfeiting one's own right to determine perception as such, one foregoes the right to self-determination. To submit to another set of explanations is, in Melville's hands, just to submit. Melville posits a situation in which the human is displaced from the subject-position of the taxonomic structure. In doing so, he frames the struggle for self-determination as a struggle for epistemological authority. In the Oberlus tale, the freedom of the slave from the master is dependent upon the assertion of opposition to external classification. While in this final case classification *of* the self is a requirement for self-determination, in the rest of "The Encantadas" Melville shows that classification *by* the self is just as fundamental a part of individual constitution. By depicting a narrative struggle for epistemological authority in the final sketch, Melville physicalizes the struggle that he has been enacting in the sketches leading up to it. To lose the right to understanding and classifying, to lose authorship of experience as Hunilla renders it and the knowledge derived from experience that Tarnmoor models, is to lose the right to identity.

Whether the Oberlus parable is taken as a warning or a natural result of epistemological obeisance, it is representative of the way Melville treats perception and classification throughout "The Encantadas," and it contextualizes his resistance to the type of submission that young Darwin willingly makes to his scientific predecessors. To Melville, perception becomes constitutive of the self; to forfeit the right of perceptual determination is to forfeit the right to self-construction. Epistemological deference becomes the beginning of submission, and submission becomes the beginning of personal domination. The Galapagos Archipelago as Melville writes it is a site in which to regain personal mastery, with all the dangers that come with it. Though this power by no means provides relief from the suffering that characterizes the work---in many cases it seems even to deepen it---it is a reclamation of the power to determine in a world that to Melville appears always already determined. Life on a ship "dissolve[s]...the whole moral man" (384); life on the mainland is seen only in an instance of imprisonment. What is for Darwin a place to apply and expand antecedent bodies of knowledge is for Melville a place to demonstrate the dangers of such knowledge. And what is for Darwin a setting in which to establish himself within those systems is, for Melville, a place where the suffering inherent in loss of self is most acutely felt. There may be comfort in Darwin's relation to knowledge---but it is, to Melville, a comfort that comes with domination. 

[^1]: This excludes "Amblyrhyncus" in the front flap, which appears to be a post-hoc description of contents.

[^2]: Leposoma is a genus, and "Spix" refers to the source of the genus, an 1824 work on the natural history of Brazil. (*Notebooks* 430 n854). 

[^3]: In addition to giving Darwin the benefit of the doubt where scientific rigor is concerned, this supposition is based on the observations themselves, which mostly limit themselves to behaviors that can be qualified as instinctual or are not represented as such.

[^3.1]: There is no verb in this latter fragmentary example, so of course the habitual present question does not apply in a literal sense; nevertheless the sense of the fragment implies the habitual present, in that "off with your jacket" can only be read as a repeated action or command (the pirates taking one's jacket or demanding that it be removed).

[^4.1]: Aristóbulo Pérez, Germán Gutiérrez, and Alejandro Segura point out in their study on the role of behavioral observations in *The Voyage of the Beagle* categorize Darwin's observations within their own system of classification. Counting instances of mention, description, comparison, explanation, hypothesis, and experimentation, they point out that 11% of Darwin's observations are presented as comparisons (513-5). They continue to specify the type of comparisons that occur: "The use of comparison, as much of anatomical structures as of their functions, permits Darwin to give account of the evolutionary processes in species." (Perez et al. 514. My translation of "el uso de la comparación tanto de las estructuras anatómicas como de sus funciones, le permite a Darwin dar cuenta de los procesos evolutivos en las especies")

[^4.2]: Which characterizes another 51% of Darwin's observations (Peréz et al. 513). In this use of description, Darwin shows how embedded his identity as a natural historian truly is. Foucault makes a similar observation in discussing the qualities of perception that distinguish natural history from its predecessors: "By limiting and filtering the visible, structure enables it to be transcribed into language. It permits the visibility of animal or plant to pass over in its entirety into the discourse that receives it" (135). Darwin's descriptions to confirm Foucault's observations about the classifying representation, but they also show the extent to which the scientific gaze is a dissecting one. The "pass[ing] over...into the discourse that receives it" does not occur without a certain measure of dismemberment and re-formation. Later in Foucault's "Classifying" chapter: "description is to the object one looks at what the proposition is to the representation it expresses: its arrangement in a series, elements succeeding elements" (136). Darwin's move here and throughout his *Voyage* notes is to separate the elements to better understand the whole---but that understanding comes from the discourse that requires an elemental dissection.

[^5]: The state of the theory transmutation of species prior to Darwin was defined by the conflict of Georges Cuvier with Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire and Jean Baptiste Lamarck: the debate came down to the question of a "unified plan," as supported by Saint-Hilaire and vilified by Cuvier, which organized the disparate parts of an organism and is necessary for any theory of gradual transmutation of species (Perrier 99-108); Darwin implicitly supports a "unified plan" in his analyses, but does not accept the Lamarckian schema of species inheritance. For Lamarck, environmental conditions determine generational transmutation of species; traits are acquired by the needs of an organism in a given environment. These traits are subsequently passed on to the following generation, which continues the gradual development of the trait. Darwin rejects this theory, and eventually comes to displace it with his own.

[^6]: In his article "Lyell's Pillars of Wisdom," Stephen Jay Gould summarizes gradualism as: "Modern causes, operating entirely within the range of rates now observable, can explain the full spectrum of geological history Apparently grandiose or catastrophic events really occur by a summation of small changes through the immensity of geological time-the deep canyon carved grain by grain, the high mountain raised in numerous increments of earthquake and eruption over millions of years."

[^7]: Tanyol makes a similar observation in her discussion of Rock Rodondo (259).

[^8]: Discussed above: "quote".

[^a]: By a "required" structure of data I refer to the legacy of Linnaeus, among whose major contributions to the field of natural history was to structure observation with discrete categories defined by an evolving taxonomic system. See Edmond Perrier's *The Philosophy of Zoology before Darwin*, especially pp. 29-32. Perrier's statement (1884) of Linnaeus that he "was convinced that all creatures are related in a logical fashion, much as our thoughts are linked to one another in an uninterrupted chain" could define the tension between observation and classification in this early work of Darwin: the young Darwin appears implicitly to suppose this affinity, only to repeatedly call it into question in moments when the chain is unclear (29).

[^b]: "The *Beagle*'s mission was to complete the survey of the South American coast begun by the first voyage, take accurate longitude readings with the twenty-four chronometers aboard, and make geophysical measurements" (14). This in part coincides with the secondary imperial aims of the "Beagle" journey, which is a partial focus of Denise Tanyol's "The Alternative Taxonomies of Melville's 'The Encantadas,'" discussed more extensively below.

[^c]: William B. Dillingham suggests that the "sailors that Oberlus captures and enslaves undergo…[a] kind of reverse evolution to a lower form of life" (79).

[^d]: Thomas Bell (1792-1880) was a dental surgeon and a zoologist, whose works of natural history such as *History of British Reptiles* (1839) would eventually win him presidentship of the Linnean Society, in which position he would receive Darwin's and Wallace's papers on natural selection and the origin of species (to which he would prove a stern critic). As professor of zoology at King's College, London and a fellow fo the Linnaean Society, Bell was well known to Darwin and would eventually provide much-needed zoological expertise in the preparation of Darwin's *Voyage* notes and collections (Cleevely).

[^f]: This paper does not engage extensively with Michel Foucault, but to proceed without some reference to his *The Order of Things* would be an oversight. My main point of Foucauldian contact is in pointing out Darwin's inherited body of contextual knowledge: the account that follows will detail the effects of a guiding perceptual consciousness inflected with a nascent natural history, a field in which (as Foucault puts it) "[t]he plant is...engraved in the material of the language into which it has been transposed, and recompenses its pure form before the reader's very eyes," and in which the "book becomes the herbarium of living structures" (135). I will argue in part that this mediated perceptual classification affects not only Darwin's consciousness and classification of other creatures, but also his self-consciousness and constitution of himself.

