
[Darwin's invitation arose as part of this "outfitting," and he is chosen for his social and epistemological deference as well as his ability. In August 1931, Fitzroy wrote to his superiors in the Navy requesting a naturalist fit for the voyage, and is led to Darwin only through the extended professional network of Cambridge University (Browne and Neve 5). The recommendation eventually comes from John Stevens Henslow, a Professor of Botany at St. John's whom Darwin met through a weekly series of events that is both social and instructional, meant to acquaint student naturalists with the preceding generation. The choice of Darwin the human "instrumentation" for the voyage, then, is determined by systems internal to Cambridge, which are both social and intellectual in nature, and would require of Darwin a willingness to place himself within a hierarchy as a thinker and an observer. His ability to make observations is evaluated not by what he is able to see, but by his ability to see *according to*, to see the physical and behavioral keys that correspond to a system of classification.]


The word "collection" is used deliberately here, for Darwin's love of *collecting* as a means of and predecessor to understanding is well documented; moreover, the logic of the collection is useful as a description of the *Voyage* project and its epistemological situation. As a child, Darwin had a marked and unusually diligent love of collecting natural specimens, which continued well into the time of his "Beagle" voyage (Rosenberg 85). His role as a collector as well as a natural historian proceeded to such a degree that Robert McCormick, the expedition's senior naturalist in charge of the expedition's official collection, left the "Beagle" at its first port, outraged by the presence of a competing collector (Browne and Neve 11). That Darwin was collecting as well as cataloguing is significant insofar as it provides a lens through which to see his sense of his own project: a collection is a reorganization, and representation in miniature, of the ecological environment from which it is pulled. 

Considering the *Voyage* as a linked set of collections in itself also explains certain acts of organization---and reorganization---that occur in the "Galapagos Archipelago" chapter. Both structurally and in specific instances, Darwin shows his hand in organizing his observations according to a logic internal to his project; this logic is reconcilable with the antecedent body of natural history that informs his observations, but it is not entirely identifiable with it. In presenting the beaks of finches, for example, his own organization as a collector comes into conflict with a more scientific and taxonomic organization. At first, he points out that "a nearly perfect gradation may be traced, from a beak extraordinarily thick, to one so fine, that it may be compared to that of a warbler" (287). Soon after, however, his own organization of specimens as a collector gives way to a structure more consistent with taxonomic hierarchy: 
>I very much suspect, that certain members of the series are confined to different islands; therefore, if the collection had been made on any *one* island, it would not have presented so perfect a gradation. It is clear, that if several islands have each their peculiar species of the same genera, when these are placed together, they will have a wide range of character. But there is not space in this work, to enter on this curious subject. (288) 

This is one of the most important passages of the "Galapagos Archipelago" chapter of the *Voyage* from a scientific perspective, as it raises the questions of transmutation of species that would later form the foundation for his theory of evolution, but the passage also exhibits a conflict between two different kinds of organization. The first, hypothetical one is structured according to the set of possible relationships to be drawn among the specimens. But this structure, and the organizing act that precedes it, is rejected in favor 

Tension between the genres of travelogue, diary, and work of natural history leads to a conflicted and amorphous structure of the chapter. The early part of the chapter is marked by dated entries, which gives the sense if not of a narrative than at least of a chronology. Passages of scientific description and anecdote mingle, placing emphasis on Darwin as an observer situated in time and place. In what is ostensibly still the October 3rd entry, though, this chronological frame gives way to the purely taxonomic, describing time and place but somehow hovering above and outside of it. Where paragraphs in the section had previously begun with phrases like "During another day" and "During the greater part of our week," an pronouncement that Darwin "will now offer a few general observations on the natural history of these islands" initiates a new structure according taxonomic categories (from family to order down to species)(273-4). Paragraphs now begin: "Of mammalia" (275); "I will first describe the habits of the tortoise" (276); "To conclude with the order of reptiles" (285). By merging structures, Darwin also merges types of record; the personal, the anecdotal, the experimental, and the taxonomic become different entries in a textual, archipelagic collection. Darwin himself becomes a part of the collection.[^4.2] **[What about the beaks? The gradient thing is important]





seeing people

As for the other side of the mirror, the observer: when dealing with non-human creatures and things the transformation of the observer is effected by mood, memory, and range of associations, all of which are altered by each thing perceived and alter in turn future acts of perception. In "Two Sides to a Tortoise," the "Sketch Second" section,