---
title: Title
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
profname: Professor Ross Posnock
coursename: Aesthetes, Aesthetics, and Aestheticism
bibliography: posnock.bib
csl: mla.csl
date: 12 May 2015
---

*The Portrait of a Lady* and *The House of Mirth* are both novels framed by houses, but Gardencourt and Bellomont, the manors at the center of each, in most senses could not be more different. Gardencourt is secluded and very, very old, tucked away near the Thames forty miles from London, home to an aging ex-banker and his ailing son. It gets visitors, but it is far from a social hub. Bellomont is a destination for New York's socialites and a site of most events one ought not to miss, a pinnacle of good taste and good breeding. Each becomes a symbol to the heroine of its respective novel, albeit of different things: Gardencourt of relative security and reliable social relationships, and Bellomont of unthinking excess and the ease of limitless wealth. One might think of these as novels of *spaces* as much as novels of people.

Despite this shared concern with the narrative construction of space, however, the novels describe and use space in distinct ways and to distinct ends. Henry James's tendency to think of his fiction in terms of architecture is often understood as a metaphorical reference to the complex structure of his novels---a reading that is justified by some of the more overt references to architecture in his theoretical and critical writing. This understanding of architecture only as a metaphor for narrative structure, though, misses the way he manipulates space and architecture in the scenes themselves to facilitate and mirror social relationships. Meanwhile, although Edith Wharton's use of space is often read in terms of architectural space and relationality---a reading more appropriately reserved for James---her interest in interior decorating as a form of aesthetic self-expression is lost. 

Comparing the use and construction of space in these two novels brings into focus the way that designed space influences the relational aesthetics of the two novels. It also isolates a difference in the aesthetic capacities of architecture and decoration, forms that are related but contain important differences in their narrative capabilities. In these two novels, architecture and decorating serve distinct purposes. Architecture tends to facilitate interaction by creating the conditions for the aesthetic transmission of social truths; James thus uses architecture in an almost painterly way as a compositional tool, organizing space in a way that best communicates the structure of what it contains. Decoration, on the other hand, becomes an aesthetic expression of the individual responsible for it, and is therefore a form of communication that can be used to read the character responsible for it in a part social, part aesthetic way. This paper will argue that *The Portrait of a Lady* tends toward an architectural spatial aesthetic and *The House of Mirth* tends toward a decorative aesthetic. Examining the difference in the two aesthetic modes uncovers spatial corollaries for the construction of relational and individual subjectivities, paradigms that define the distinct modes of characterization in the work of James and Wharton more broadly.

# Visual Architecture in James's Theory and Criticism

Nowhere is Henry James's concern with space and architecture more clearly stated than in the Preface to the New York Edition of *The Portrait of a Lady*, where he argues that space is best used to establish interaction without obscuring any of what is essential to that interaction (@james_portrait_1975). While in other of his statements this preoccupation is mostly used as a metaphorical link between the "structure" of novels and architectural structures, here he presents an alternative logic according to which spatial form can be used to narratively and visually organize scenes and relationships.[^2]  In a reading of scene in terms of a similar sense of "form," Ellen Eve @frank_literary_1983 argues, "To James...'form' seems to be a shape or 'frame'---it limits and encloses the subject, surrounds the scene, determines the scope---and a position, a distance or angle, a vantage point, what we more often think of as literary or narrative technique" (qtd. in @machlan_there_2005 185). These are curiously visual terms that grant a great deal of determining power to form of all kinds, and especially of a spatial kind. The narrative use of spatial form is not just a mechanism used in developing scenes, though. It is also important in his development of character:

> If I watch [my characters] long enough I see them come together, I see them *placed*, I see them engaged in this or that act and in this or that difficulty. How they look and move and speak and behave, always in the setting I have found for them, is my account of them---of which I dare say, alas, *que cela manque souvent d'architecture*. But I would rather, I think, have too little architecture than too much---when there's a danger of its interfering with my measure of the truth. (5)

The moment when the characters "come together" is the moment that James comes to know them, not before, implying a link between relationality and an interaction with shared space. The spatial aspects of character formation are reinforced as James specifies seeing his characters "*placed*" as a precursor to any action, and again when he reiterates purely for emphasis (it would be implied otherwise) that when his characters *do* things it is "always in the setting I have found for them." The deterministic power he attributes to place can be seen in his concern with "interfering with...the truth": relational "truth" takes precedence to any elaborate structuring, and while some measure of carefully constructed spatial form is necessary to attain this truth, too much inhibits it. In other words, James's hybrid of narrative, visual, and architectural constructions of space determines the object of attention without ever becoming that object itself. Carefully constructed space enables narrative encounters to happen, but in his hands architecture is never a direct participant the encounter itself. This view of architecture makes it a unique aesthetic form from those that can, as objects of contemplation themselves, be part of the encounter in itself. Architectural space is, rather, as Frank suggests, a "frame," to enable what he considers the basic function of the novel: to organize "an 'ado,' an ado about something" (9).  But to frame an "ado" is not just a matter of an isolated scene's visual frame or "vantage point." It implies a particular relationship that must also be mediated by the frame. 

With his social version of determining spatial forms in mind, James's comparisons of novel writing with painting[^3] in his essay "The Art of Fiction" take on a new meaning, especially the visual and spatial terms of his definition of "experience." Simply put, spatial construction offers a bridge between the novelist's germ of experience and the transmission of that experience's "truth" through the medium of narrative. In James's view, the novelist's task begins with experience, but only if experience is understood in a particular, somewhat atmospheric sense. Relating an anecdote of composition borrowed from an English novelist, he gives an example of what he means: she says she "passed an open door where, in the household of a *pasteur*, some of the young Protestants were seated at table round a finished meal. The glimpse made a picture; it lasted only a moment, but that moment was experience" (@james_art_1884). Experience is first, then, momentary---not the walk up the stairs, not any conversations overheard among the Protestants, except insofar as they contribute to the single "glimpse" that passes in an instant. This version of experience is also, definitively, visual and bounded, making a "picture" that is bounded in space by the door frame and in time by the moment. In the essay in which it appears, this anecdote is an example of a more abstract definition of experience that further emphasizes its atmospheric nature, its momentariness, and its reliance on the visual:

> Experience is never limited and it is never complete; it is an immense sensibility, a kind of huge spider-web, of the finest silken threads, suspended in the chamber of consciousness and catching every air-borne particle in its tissue. It is the very atmosphere of the mind; and when the mind is imaginative...it takes to itself the faintest hints of life, it converts the very pulses of the air into revelations. (@james_art_1884)

Here experience itself is "atmospheric" in a slightly different sense than that in which architecture, as an ambient aesthetic form, is "atmospheric": experience is a primarily mental phenomenon (an "atmosphere of the mind") in which sensation and observation become "revelations." But in converting unbounded experience into something communicable, some limiting factor is necessary. In the anecdote of the English novelist, the limiting factors are those that link it most to visual media: a bounded frame in time and space, and a situated observer. In this anecdote, more architecture is at play than the door frame, even if it is not explicitly mentioned. The way that the layout of the space guides the movement of the observer and the way the eating space is organized in relation to the rest of the house have also to be considered. It is in a similar sense that narratively, as Elizabeth Boyle @machlan_there_2005 says, that "houses do not only set the scene; they suggest a course of action" (398). But while these other architectural elements are surely at play in the framing of the novelist's experience, the transmission of it coalesces in a single visual moment that becomes a revelation. If James is worried in his preface to the New York edition about including "too much" of the architecture that goes into such moments, it must be because doing so would burst through the boundaries necessary for the isolation of an image. The means by which architecture determines the transmission of such experiences are as much exclusionary as accumulative, and this suggests the necessity of reading those that are included. If they are in print despite such a stringent pruning process, they must be doing some kind of non-ornamental work.

# Wharton's Theories of Decorative and Written Self-Expression
	
If James is unambiguous in his concern with architecture, Wharton is even more forthcoming in her interest in home decoration and interior design. In 1897, she published a treatise on interior decorating called *The Decoration of Houses*, which she co-authored with Ogden Codman Jr., a noted architect and interior decorator (@wharton_decoration_1907). The general thesis of this manual---especially its introduction---is that the degradation of the decorative arts stems from the extent to which decorating "has ceased to be a branch of architecture" (xx). In Wharton's view, the status of decoration as an application of surface ornament rather than as an interaction with the underlying architectural structure marks its failure as a medium. She begins by distinguishing architecture from a debased form of interior design: "Rooms may be decorated in two ways: by a superficial application of ornament totally independent of structure, or by means of those architectural features which are part of the organism of every house, inside as well as out" (xix). The latter becomes the target of a quiet polemic-by-counterexample through the guidance she provides in the rest of the manual. It would seem that an argument such as this would make any separation of decoration from architecture difficult to maintain, and indeed in the work of other critics writing on similar themes, the two become almost interchangeable.[^1] In this line of thinking, Wharton's decorative literary aesthetic and James's architectural one might almost blend, especially considering Edith Wharton's association with James and her "opportunities for countless conversations on their long walks and drives through the Berkshire countryside" (@fryer_felicitous_1986 74). 

While it may be tempting to unite these two spatial aesthetics as "architectural," however, doing so risks obscuring the specificities of decoration as its own form of aesthetic expression as well as the way Wharton distinguishes her narrative use of decoration from her narrative use of architecture. On one hand, as Liisa Stephenson has recently suggested, Wharton uses "a similar architectural analogy" in her discussions of space and writing and "reveals her attunement to the correspondences between literature and architecture" by referring to the architectural nature of the novels of Henry James (1097). But the reference to his architectural theories of fiction also contain a telling critique: "As [James] became more and more preoccupied with the architecture of the novel he unconsciously subordinated all else to his ever-fresh complexities of design, so that his last books are magnificent projects for future masterpieces rather than living creations" (@wharton_writing_1925 117). In the first place, this statement refers to the metaphorical use of architectural structure in reference solely to narrative structure, not the incorporation of architectural forms into the scenes themselves. But the final distinction between "future masterpieces" and "living creations" deserves more attention. It is far from immediately clear why an architectural conception of the novel would be so antithetical to "living creations," or even what this distinction is meant to isolate. One hint from earlier in the same essay almost echoes James himself in his concern with the bounding of experience:

> The impression produced by a landscape, a street or a house should always, to the novelist, be an event in the history of a soul, and the use of the "descriptive passage," and its style, should be determined by the fact that it must depict only what the intelligence concerned would have noticed, and always in terms within the register of that intelligence. (85)

This passage evokes a Jamesian aesthetic in emphasis on restraint in the proliferation of detail: his reluctance to include "too much" architecture corresponds to Wharton's evident concern with exceeding the bounds of the "intelligence" in question. But the major difference between the two can be summarized as a difference between relational characterization and the concern with individual consciousness as a characterization technique. James's organizing consciousness is that of the artist in both anecdotes---of his characters coming to him "placed" and the English novelist coming upon a "glimpse" of experience. That Wharton couples the organizing consciousness of the novelist and the perceiving consciousness of the character suggests that the details space and spatial forms can be used to read the characters responsible for them. The "intelligence concerned" has to be understood as contextual and idiosyncratic---not every character is going to notice the same things, with those more attuned to decorating noticing the draperies and those with painting the portrait above the mantle. If anything a character notices is said to be a "history of [the] soul" of that character, as Wharton says, spatial details can be read backwards to reveal the characteristics of the perceiving consciousness. The logic of inclusion is as much a part of a character as what they say or do.

That may be a sufficient explanation of this ambient characterization where only fixed surroundings are concerned, such as "a landscape, a street or a house," but when the object of attention has been arranged by one of the characters, more than one organizing consciousness is in play. Thus, more than one characterization is at play as well. Just as the perception of aesthetic details can be used to read the characters responsible for them in Wharton's fiction, so can the interior details she arranges as a novelist be read as the decorative choices of the character responsible for that decoration. When a character is observing the decorative arrangements of another character---especially when all three parties, both characters and the novelist, are consummate decorators taking notice of the details---the confluence of noticing and organizing constitutes a social interaction. Just as one character speaks and another hears, so one decorates and another notices. In contrast to space as purely atmospheric and a facilitator of interaction, as it is in *The Portrait of a Lady*, Wharton's decorative treatment of space in *The House of Mirth* is primarily an aesthetic expression of the person responsible for it, not just a frame for or influence on the people it frames. 

The use of decoration as characterization is a product of Wharton's status as a decorator in her own right. As she herself puts it in a more general writing context: "The novelist works in the very material out of which the object he is trying to render is made. He must use, to express the soul, the signs which soul uses to express itself" (16-7). In this context, the "material" is a well-chosen upholstery or fresh flowers on the table. That she writes characters as intimately involved with decorating as she does allows her to share not just the decorator's eye, but the decorator's art: when a drapery is hung or a chair placed, it is quite literally the work of both Wharton and the character who owns the room. Underlying this, however, is a distinct method of characterization through expression. If James's characters are developed by being "placed" and interacting with each other, Wharton's are developed individually based on their decorative (or aesthetic) choices.

These divergent uses of spatial aesthetics may be clear in their theories of writing, but it remains to be seen how they look in practice. Tracing these types of spatial construction through the two novels will show that architecture and decoration work as both guidelines for action and topics of consideration in themselves.

# The Architecture of Relational Spaces in *The Portrait of a Lady*

Space dominates the opening scenes of *Portrait*, exemplifying the anteriority of setting to character in James's process and further isolating his painterly manipulation of space as a framing device. The "shadows on the perfect lawn [that] were straight and angular" establish a visual frame for the scene, and the description builds to the moment when the not-yet-named elder Touchett "rest[s] his eyes upon the rich red front of his dwelling" (17). The introduction of Gardencourt, one of the defining spaces of the novel, concludes an opening paragraph rife with elaborate narrations of time and visual shape; it even defines the other visual details after the fact, being deemed "the most characteristic object in the peculiarly English picture I have attempted to sketch" (17-8). The descriptive movement from the foreground to the background places a great deal of weight on the house itself, which is only introduced as a finale to establish the bounds of the picture. When the house is characterized, it is as something that *exists* but was not *created* within the novel's purview---the house has a history defined by what has passed through it, whether that be the reign of Edward the Sixth, a night's sleep by Elizabeth, or scars of Cromwell's wars (18). Nothing about character is established until the visual and historical details of the house have been, and when people do appear they do so mostly through visual description (they do not have so much as names for pages) (18-9). 

These opening pages provide an elaborate example of what James means when he says his characters come to him only when they are "placed" in his mind. Between the opening and the first lines of dialogue, several levels of framing are established: atmosphere through the time of day, abstract visual forms through shadows and the movement of characters, and finally a more specific social setting through the placement of the house. Specific characterization is left secondary to the characterization of place. The sole architectural structure concludes the setting the scene, but not until it has a visual field to exist within.

Visual space and built structures often intervene more directly in interactions among characters, however, and when they do the visual composition reflects and characterizes those relationships. In the moment of Isabel's first appearance, for example, spatial logics, relational logics, and narrative overlap and magnify each other:

> [Ralph's] face was turned toward the house, but his eyes were bent musingly on the lawn; so that he had been an object of observation to a person who had just made her appearance in the ample doorway for some moments before he perceived her. (@james_portrait_1975 25)

As a symbol of entry, the doorway is at once spatial, narrative, and relational. When Isabel "ma[kes] her appearance," she enters the space, the novel, and Ralph's life. This brief moment is highly reminiscent of the anecdote of the English novelist from "The Art of Fiction": the "moments before he perceived her" are like the moment in which James's novelist comes upon the dining Protestants in an open doorway. The scene Isabel sees, however, is not one that we have access to exactly as she receives it. We are embedded instead in Ralph's perspective, with his "eyes bent musingly on the lawn," when that moment of observation takes place. Two distinct moments of observation are thus established and laid on top of one another: the first, in absentia, is Ralph's observation *by* Isabel, and the second his observation *of* her. The doorway provides a container for the relationship contained in that gaze, emphasizing the doubled perspectives that it relies on. It also creates enough separation physically and temporally (it conceals Isabel and gives her time to watch without being seen) that it causes double awareness in Ralph, of both Isabel as he observes her and himself as he is observed by her. Relationality exists in the awareness of both perspectives.  By separating Ralph off from the herd, as it were, and having Isabel appear in the absence of her aunt, James limits the interaction to two people and dramatizes the complicated duplication of perspective that defines relationality. A very similar structure notably defines the introduction of Madame Merle,[^4] and it recurs throughout. 

Besides introducing characters, James's narrative use of space conveys information about the nature of the relationships it contains by situating the narrative in a single perspective, both visually and in terms of thought, thereby permitting a doubling of visual and relational forms. The perception of one of these dually spatial and relational structures comes to the consciousness of the reader mediated by that of the character who perceives the entire situation in a single spatial "picture" or "scene." The most dramatic of these moments occurs when Isabel comes upon Merle and Osmond in secret conference, an encounter that "str[ikes] her as something detected" (343). In a setup that is, by now, familiar in its echo of James's anecdote of the momentary "glimpse," Isabel pauses "[j]ust beyond the threshold of the drawing-room" because she has "received an impression" from the orientation of Osmond and Merle. It is not immediately clear why she "receive[s]" this impression: the mode of transmission is ineffable, but the elements of it are visual and spatial. Isabel stands in the threshold of a doorway, Madame Merle is "standing on the rug, a little way from the fire," and Osmond is "in a deep chair, leaning back and looking at her" their relative positions (Merle stands while Osmond sits) could lead to a social explanation, but Isabel rejects this by noting that "they were old friends" (342-3).[^5] Rather, Isabel receives this impression because "the thing made an image, lasting only a moment, like a flicker of light" (343). 

Imagistic impressions are granted a truth value that transcends what can be gleaned from social cues, which are unreliable throughout. The way these images are rendered narratively and, one presumes, in the eyes of Isabel, is by the relative orientation of elements in space. The description of Merle and Osmond is most concerned with orienting them with respect to a fixed structure in the room, the fireplace; their relative positions and Osmond's deep-lying glance make a diagonal composition guided by his line of sight as he looks up at her. As in the previous cases, the scene is framed by a sudden entrance, a moment of time *outside* of social relations, and a physical structure. Isabel's placement outside of the intimate space mirrors spatially what she realizes, in a flash, about her relationships with the two: that she is on the outside of this confidence looking in, and that the true social "inside" is just beyond her. As will happen much later in the novel, "the truth of things, their mutual relations, their meaning, and for the most part their horror, r[i]se before her with a kind of architectural vastness" (465). It is not just architectural in its scale, but in its kind. Space is a powerful communicator of social structures such as these that span multiple characters, even as it frames the relationships that nominally define them.

To limit the use of architecture in James's writing and thinking on writing to metaphors of how he structures his novels risks obscuring the way he uses architecture in a more painterly way to organize space in a given scene. Spatial orientation, which is frequently determined by the narrative manipulation of built spaces, often establishes or communicates important information about relational structures. Remarkably, these communications are intelligible to character and reader alike. James's use of "architecture" broadly conceived, then, mirrors the use of architecture in painting as a way to communicate a "glimpse" or "impression" through visual structuring and the orientation of elements in space.

# Decorating as Characterization in *The House of Mirth*

In *The House of Mirth*, designed spaces like James's Gardencourt that exist without being built are nowhere to be found. The objects placed in Wharton's drawing rooms, and by extension the environments they create, are in some cases almost as important in defining the person responsible for placing them there as the words and actions that constitute the plot. Occasional jabs at the decorating show Wharton's own judgment as a decorator coming through, as in Selden's early comment that when he does come to visit Lily at her Aunt Peniston's "it's not to look at Mrs. Peniston's furniture" (@wharton_house_1990 9). And Selden's own apartment, described in the passage leading up to his quip, are just as expressive about him: the "slip of a hall hung with old prints," his "letters and notes heaped on the table among his gloves and sticks," his "small library, dark but cheerful," and his "shabby leather chairs" do important work to characterize him (8). Selden can be read in his possessions, and so can Lily in her interpretation of them---of the chairs as "shabby" and the space as "cheerful." Their relationship as would-be lovers separated indelibly by the difference in their material tastes and aspirations is settled well before the cake is served. 

Decoration is the overriding presence in Wharton's novel, and its narrative (and social) uses are distinguished both by the reading of decorated spaces and their implied construction. Selden's case is in some ways representative of the trend, but his bachelor's apartment is an anomalous space in a novel more obviously concerned with ornate and highly designed manors. A more representative, if contrasting, pair would be rooms designed by Mrs. Peniston and Mrs. Dorset. While Lily is at first relieved to discover that "Mrs. Peniston's opulent interior was at least not externally dingy," she quickly discovers that "dinginess is a quality which assumes all manner of disguises" and that "it was as latent in the expensive routine of her aunt's life as in the makeshift existence of a continental pension" (31). It is not just the appearance that matter's in one's choice of decorating, then; the routines are just as telling of one's character. The regularity and religious observance with which Mrs. Peniston rotates the linens and redecorates at the end of summer represents to Lily the height of this routine dinginess, apparently because it is so financially conservative and expresses so little (characteristics that appear to correlate quite closely) (78). In contrast to this almost funereal, Victorian dinginess, Lily admires and is rejuvenated by the more opulent (and implicitly wasteful) decorations of Mrs. Dorset:

>Everything in her surroundings ministered to feelings of ease and amenity....There was nothing new to Lily in these tokens of a studied luxury; but, though they formed a part of her atmosphere, she never lost her sensitiveness to their charm. Mere display left her with a sense of superior distinction; but she felt an affinity to all the subtler manifestations of wealth. (34)

The "tokens of a studied luxury" establish a state that exists beyond them, exhibiting something more fundamental in the person arranging them. Although they are "manifestations of wealth," they are specified as the "*subtler*" manifestations of it, suggesting, with "studied," the art that goes into the "charm." This moment in which Lily basks in her surroundings appears to establish her ideal, the decorative pinnacle to which she aspires. The success of this decoration appears to be measured by the extent to which it heightens in the connoisseur "a sense of superior distinction." The designed space becomes a collaboration between the arranger and the observer.

Both of these passages also illustrate the extent to which this particular aesthetic and social interaction is, as much as anything, an extension of wealth. While Wharton's use of decorated space is as a fundamentally expressive and social vehicle, it is a feature much more embedded in economic, gendered, and social relations than the apparently spontaneously occurring spaces that animate (but do not participate in) James's social interactions. Decoration in Wharton enters a network of facts and situations surrounding---even determining---the nature of a character, a network that includes social conditions and inequalities.

With this connection to social conditions in mind, one is able to detect the presence of the more economic and gendered plot lines of *House of Mirth* manifested in interiors. Lily's economic status and the freedom of self-expression this entails, chief among the desires driving her character, can be measured in the extent to which she is able to control the space around her. The inability to decorate as one pleases marks, retrospectively, the beginning of Lily's descent into the threat of dire straits that defines the narrative. When Lily's father becomes financially ruined, it is announced by her sudden inability to correct the problem of fading flowers, a problem it would cost twelve dollars a day to fix (27-8). The inability to control a space absolutely is imbued with all the tragedy of financial ruination, as though the freedom to do so were the ultimate point of wealth. And indeed, in Lily's eyes, it may be. It appears to be so in the extent to which many of the novel's defining conflicts are expressed in terms of their effect on the ability to decorate. An apparent joke between Lily and Selden overstates the centrality of decorating to Lily's aspirations, but perhaps it is not as overstated as it would be with reference to a character other than Lily Bart. The exchange happens while they discuss an aborted engagement:

> "Oh, his mother was frightened---she was afraid I should have all the family jewels reset. And she wanted me to promise that I wouldn't do over the drawing-room."
> "The very thing you are marrying for!"
> "Exactly. So she packed him off to India." (10)

Just how much of Lily's machinations have the avoidance of "dinginess" and the ability to refresh flowers as their ultimate goal is difficult to assess. But certainly the primal scene of the flowers and the dread of having to live with a setting whose taste is in any way compromised seems to provide a motivation for many of Lily's actions. The desire to "do over the drawing room" seems to be a fundamental aspect of self-expression for Lily, whose aspirations elsewhere to "arrange her life as she pleased" are specified as having "smarter gowns than Judy Trenor, and far, far more jewels than Bertha Dorset" (41). To "arrange" is an act that refers to the construction of space and the act of self-determination at the same time.

The *tableaux vivants* in which Lily participates demonstrate this continuum of decorating and self-expression as clearly as one could wish, exposing as they do so a complicated middle-ground between aestheticism, social relations, and personal beauty. By turning the decorating impulse onto herself as a way of making herself into an art object, Lily definitively establishes decorating as a hybrid artistic and social form, revealing the logic of decoration that has been animating Wharton's spatial descriptions throughout. Here, Lily extends the consideration of what goes into her physical self-expression to her surroundings, thereby appropriating those surroundings as aspects of her wider self: in the tableaux, "her vivid plastic sense, hitherto nurtured on no higher food than dress-making and upholstery, found eager expression in the disposal of draperies, the study of attitudes, the shifting of lights and shadows" (103). Dress-making, upholstery, and "the disposal of draperies" are united as aspects of a single sensibility, which allows her to incorporate the "attitudes" of her own posture into the creation of an atmospheric aesthetic. The moment of display is a moment in which Lily becomes atmospheric in her own right: it is a moment in which her own beauty becomes coextensive with the ambient aesthetics of decorating. Her incorporation into the design of her environment is most clearly expressed in the distinction that it "was as though she had stepped, not out of, but into, Reynolds' canvas, banishing the phantom of his dead beauty by the beams of her living grace" (106). By sinking into the canvas she becomes part of the decorative framing of the social event that the entire tableau merely provides an occasion for. She is participating in social interactions, but her participation is aesthetic rather than strictly social. The confusion of social and aesthetic expressions here distills a liminal space that the decorative arts always inhabit, as accessories to life and aesthetic arrangements simultaneously. Lily achieves her full effect most distinctly when the cultivation of personal beauty, decorative effect, and social graces unite in the vessel of the *tableau vivant*.

In comparison to James's use of space, then, in which visual and spatial forms frame, facilitate, and influence social interactions without ever directly participating in them, Wharton's decorative use of space is a means by which characters express themselves aesthetically and respond to the aesthetic self-expressions of others. That we see Wharton's own decorative sense manifested most clearly in the spatial readings and constructions of her characters is perhaps a mark of the way that she identifies with them: she creates her worlds using them as proxies, and as such shares in their decorative and aesthetic sensibilities. The sense of a description as a "history of a soul" that she outlines in her theory of writing causes her to identify with her characters on a ground determined by the passions she shares with them. Furthermore, this communication between author and character is extended to encompass the character-character and even reader-character relationships: precisely because of the coextensive constructions of space and self, decoration is taken as an extension of the person responsible for it, and in the readings of space we get the clearest articulations of the characters responsible for reading and creating a given space. In this way space becomes a double medium, a vehicle for expression that is shared by characters and author alike.

***

The divergent uses of constructed narrative space that I have identified in *The Portrait of a Lady* and *The House of Mirth* characterize a larger difference between the authors of the two novels in the way they approach the construction of character. The famously relational approach to subjectivity that has been widely noted in James's novels determines the way he manipulates the physical settings of interactions. In contrast, the tension in Wharton between the spontaneous expression of desires and the careful cultivation of self that remain so impossible to reconcile throughout the novel only becomes further complicated in decorative self-expression, which attains the invisibility of comfort in its ideal state but requires a studied application of principles to acquire that state. Beneath these differences in the two authors' construction of character and space alike, there lies a more fundamental disagreement about whether the basic unit of subjectivity is the relation or the individual. In studying novelists as concerned with narrative spatial construction as these, it is important to attend to both the theoretical basis of their use of spatial design and its narrative applications---which do correspond, as demonstrated above, but in unexpected ways. 

[^1]: Liisa Stephenson's "Decorating Fiction: Edith Wharton's Literary Architecture" is addressed more fully below. Judith Fryer's *Felicitious Space* focuses on the floorplan of Wharton's home as a proxy for decoration, and discusses the library of Bellomont as a private space to emphasize the modular nature of her preferred home design (55-75). Both seem to me to dangerously conflate the two as they appear in fiction. The key difference, as I will argue more closely in reading *The House of Mirth*, is that architecture is an aesthetic primarily of containment while decorating is a more expressive medium. The latter retains the sense of aesthetic agency that the former obscures.

[^2]: The metaphorical usage for which James is perhaps most frequently connected with architecture---by, for example, Edith Wharton in *The Writing of Fiction*---is in the intricate structuring and "stability" of a novel. This usage is present in his preface, although he does not claim the metaphor as his own, referring instead to "a structure reared with an 'architectural' competence, as Turgenieff would have said" (11).

[^3]: James's need to break the bonds of his medium with a painterly attention to architecture may be unique in its specifics, but incorporating extra-literary aesthetics to wring the necessary effects out of literature is far from unheard of. In "Towards a New Laocoön," Clement @greenberg_towards_1988 suggests that to "imitate every other art except literature" is a way to challenge literature's representative capacities, "to expand the expressive resources of the medium...to express with greater immediacy sensations, the irreducible elements of experience" (5). Whether Greenberg's sense of "experience" is consistent with James's, it can help explain what James finds in the incorporation of architectural and visual atmospheric forms. The reduction of an event into a crystalline, experiential "glimpse" occurs on its own, but to communicate this into a "revelation" the techniques of other arts will be required. 

[^4]: Here, though, sound is introduced as a complicating factor, and the spatial structure needs to be altered to match. Hence the necessity of the various spatial distancing mechanisms James puts in place: "The drawing-room at Gardencourt was an apartment of great distances, and, as the piano was placed at the end of it furthest removed from the door at which she entered, her arrival was not noticed by the person seated before the instrument. ...[I]t was a lady whom Isabel immediately saw to be a stranger to herself, though her back was presented to the door....By the time she had made these reflexions she became aware that the lady at the piano played remarkably well" (151). The more spectatorial nature of this scene in comparison to Isabel's own introduction---we never get Merle's awareness of being watched---anticipates the secrecy of Merle's real intentions.
