***I may need to change all this to talk about spatio-relational structures and not the appearance of actual architecture, I don't think the text supports what I'm saying. So not specifically buildings, but architectural use of space narratively....

*The Portrait of a Lady* and *The House of Mirth* are novels full of houses. Gardencourt and Bellomont, the manors at the center of each, in many senses could not be more different. The former is secluded and ancient, tucked away near the Thames, home to an aging banker and his consumptive son---it gets visitors, but it is far from a social hub. The latter is a destination for New York's socialites and a site of most events one ought not to miss, a pinnacle of good taste and good breeding. Each becomes a symbol to the heroine of its novel, albeit of wildly different things: Gardencourt of relative security and reliable social relationships, and Bellomont of unthinking excess and the ease of limitless wealth. It might be excused to think of these as novels of spaces as much as of people.

Despite this shared concern with the narrative construction of space, however, the novels create and use space in very different ways, to very different ends. Henry James's stated interest in thinking of his fiction in terms of architecture is often read metaphorically as a reference to the complex structure of his novels---a reading that is justified by some of the more overt references to architecture in his theoretical and critical writing. This reading of space as a metaphor for novelistic structure on its own, though, misses his masterful manipulation of spatial forms in the scenes themselves to facilitate and mirror social relationships. Meanwhile, Edith Wharton's use of space is often read in terms of architectural space and relationality---a reading more appropriately reserved for James---while her interest in interior decorating as a form of aesthetic self-expression is lost. 

Comparing the use and construction of space in the two novels allows the narrative use of designed space in each to come into focus. It also isolates a difference in the aesthetic capacities of architecture and decoration, forms that are related but contain important differences in their narrative capabilities. In these two novels, architecture and decorating serve distinct purposes: architecture tends to facilitate relationality, while giving the relations it facilitates the cast of a given space's aesthetic; decoration, on the other hand, becomes an aesthetic expression of the individual responsible for it, and is therefore a form of relationality in itself. This paper will argue that *The Portrait of a Lady* tending more toward an architectural spatial aesthetic and *The House of Mirth* tending toward a more decorative aesthetic, and a comparison of the two aesthetics will reveal spatial corollaries for the construction of relational and individual subjectivities that defines characterization in the two novels.

# The Architecture of Relational Spaces

***need a working definition of his architectural use of space---he isn't actually using buildings, here. It's like he's using a semi-painterly, semi-architectural hybrid

Nowhere is Henry James's preoccupation with architecture more clearly stated than in the Preface to the New York Edition of *The Portrait of a Lady*. While it appears that this preoccupation is mostly used as a metaphorical link between the "structure" of novels and architectural structures, these metaphors also reveal the logic according to which he *includes* architectural forms to organize scenes and relationships. In other words, architecture does not only exist in James's writing through structural metaphors, but also as the visual structures he creates. The metaphorical usage for which James is perhaps most frequently connected with architecture---by, for example, Edith Wharton in *The Writing of Fiction*---is in the intricate structuring and "stability" of a novel. This usage is present in his preface, although he does not claim the metaphor as his own, referring instead to "a structure reared with an 'architectural' competence, as Turgenieff would have said" (11). In elaborating this sense of the "architectural" novel, though, he reveals that parts of the metaphor need not strictly refer to architecture, but might be just as well achieved by comparison to other arts, like painting. The emphasis he places on "proportion" seems to refer to balanced composition in a sense just as relevant to other visual arts. More uniquely spatial paradigms emerge elsewhere in the preface, however:

> If I watch [my characters] long enough I see them come together, I see them *placed*, I see them engaged in this or that act and in this or that difficulty. How they look and move and speak and behave, always in the setting I have found for them, is my account of them---of which I dare say, alas, *que cela manque souvent d'architecture*. But I would rather, I think, have too little architecture than too much---when there's a danger of its interfering with my measure of the truth. (5)

The moment when the characters "come together" is the moment that James comes to know them, not before. The phrase implies both relationality and the sharing of a space at the same time. The spatial aspects of this process are reinforced as he specifies seeing them "*placed*" as a precursor to any action, and again when he takes further pains to remind us that when his characters *do* things it is "always in the setting I have found for them"---something that might be taken as implied and is thus specified only for emphasis. The note of restraint in his injunction to prevent architecture from "interfering with...the truth" demonstrates the strength of the potential influence of architecture on the relational "truth" that takes precedence. By "truth" he appears to mean verisimilitude with experience, implying that any excess would be excess of authorial attention to space when compared with the attention space is given by natural consciousness. This refusal to make space the *object* of attention is essential to James's use of architecture to form space. It must not distract from what he finds essential, which is the relationality of "com[ing] together." Carefully constructed space enables narrative encounters to happen, but in his hands (in contrast to contemporary French novels, as he says) architecture is never a direct participant the encounter itself. Architectural space is, rather, a frame to enable what he considers the basic function of the novel: to organize "an 'ado,' an ado about something" (9). This view of architecture makes it a unique aesthetic form in comparison with others that can, as objects of contemplation, be part of the encounter (or "ado") in itself.

With his spatial preoccupation in mind, James's comparisons of novel writing with painting in his essay "The Art of Fiction" take on a new meaning. If it is the composition of scenes and relationship that are influenced by architectural form, and not just the structural composition of a novel, it becomes possible to consider human relationships in the context of the architectural forms in which they occur and by which they are (visually or narratively) framed. In James's view, the novelist's task can be said to begin with experience, but only if experience is understood in a very particular, very atmospheric sense. Relating the story of an English novelist, he links the creation of a story with what he calls "experience." The woman "passed an open door where, in the household of a *pasteur*, some of the young Protestants were seated at table round a finished meal. The glimpse made a picture; it lasted only a moment, but that moment was experience." Experience is, first, momentary---not the walk up the stairs, not the conversations overheard among the Protestants, except insofar as they contribute to the single "glimpse" that passes in an instant. It is also, definitively, visual, making a "picture" that is bounded in space by the door frame and in time by the moment. This anecdote is an example of a more abstract definition of experience that emphasizes its atmospheric nature in addition to its momentariness and reliance on the visual:

> Experience is never limited and it is never complete; it is an immense sensibility, a kind of huge spider-web, of the finest silken threads, suspended in the chamber of consciousness and catching every air-borne particle in its tissue. It is the very atmosphere of the mind; and when the mind is imaginative...it takes to itself the faintest hints of life, it converts the very pulses of the air into revelations. 

There is nothing explicitly architectural, of course, in this passage, unless one were to take the spider-web against the grain and make it into an architectural form in itself. As an introduction to the visual and momentary version of experience his example elaborates, however, it does contextualize the atmospheric use of architecture James outlines in his preface to the New York edition of *Portrait*. Here experience itself is "atmospheric" in a slightly different sense than that in which architecture is "atmospheric": it is a primarily mental phenomenon in which sensation and observation become "revelations." But in converting unbounded experience into something communicable, some limiting factor is necessary. In the anecdote of the English novelist, this limiting facto is the picturesque and the momentary: a bounded frame in time and space, and a situated observer. If James is worried in his preface to the New York edition about including "too much" architecture, it must be because doing so would burst through the boundaries necessary for the picturesque. Architecture becomes almost as much a painterly tool of atmospheric composition as a narrative one. 

James's need to break the bonds of his medium with a painterly attention to architecture may be unique in its specifics, but to find that one must incorporate extra-literary aesthetics to make literature do what one asks of it is not unheard of. In "Towards a New Laocoön," Clement Greenberg suggests that to "imitate every other art except literature" is a way to challenge literature's representative capacities, "to expand the expressive resources of the medium...to express with greater immediacy sensations, the irreducible elements of experience" (5). Whether Greenberg's sense of "experience" is consistent with James's, it can help explain what James finds in the incorporation of architectural and visual atmospheric forms. The reduction of an event into a crystalline, experiential "glimpse" occurs on its own, but to communicate this into a "revelation" the techniques of other arts will be required. 
	
While James is unambiguous in his interest in architecture, Wharton is even more forthcoming in her interest in home decoration and interior design. In 1897, she published a treatise on interior decorating called *The Decoration of Houses*, which she co-authored with Ogden Codman Jr., a noted architect and interior decorator (Stephenson 1097). The general thesis of this manual---especially it's introduction---is that the degradation of the decorative arts stems from the extent to which decorating "has ceased to be a branch of architecture": conceiving of it as an application of surface ornament rather than an interaction with the structure of the underlying architecture is represented as a great failure of the medium. She begins by distinguishing architecture from a debased form of interior design: "Rooms may be decorated in two ways: by a superficial application of ornament totally independent of structure, or by means of those architectural features which are part of the organism of every house, inside as well as out" (xix). The latter becomes the target of a quiet polemic-by-counterexample throughout the guidance of her book. It would seem that an argument such as this would make any separation of decoration from architecture difficult to maintain, and indeed in the work of other critics writing on similar themes, the two become almost interchangeable.[^1] In this line of thinking, Wharton's decorative literary aesthetic and James's architectural one might almost blend, especially considering Edith Wharton's association with James and her "opportunities for countless conversations on their long walks and drives through the Berkshire countryside" (Fryer 74). 

While it may be tempting to unite these two spatial arts under one larger one, however, doing so risks obscuring the specificities of decoration as its own form of aesthetic expression as well as Wharton's narrative use of decoration as distinct from her narrative use of architecture. On one hand, as Liisa Stephenson suggests, Wharton uses "a similar architectural analogy" in her discussions of space and writing and "reveals her attunement to the correspondences between literature and architecture" by referring to the architectural nature of his novels (1097). But the reference to his architectural theories of fiction also contain a telling critique: "As [James] became more and more preoccupied with the architecture of the novel he unconsciously subordinated all else to his everfresh complexities of design, so that his last books are magnificent projects for future masterpieces rather than living creations" (*Writing* 117). In the first place, this statement refers to the metaphorical use of architectural structure to refer to narrative structure, not the incorporation of architectural forms into the scenes themselves. But the final distinction deserves more attention. It is far from immediately clear why an architectural conception of the novel would be so antithetical to "living creations," or even what this distinction is meant to isolate. One hint from earlier in the same essay almost echoes James himself in his concern with verisimilitude and the bounding of experience:

> The impression produced by a landscape, a street or a house should always, to the novelist, be an event in the history of a soul, and the use of the "descriptive passage," and its style, should be determined by the fact that it must depict only what the intelligence concerned would have noticed, and always in terms within the register of that intelligence. (85)

The senses in which this passage evokes a Jamesian aesthetic is in its boundedness and restraint of detail: the fear of "too much" architecture corresponds to Wharton's evident concern with exceeding the bounds of the intelligence in question. But the major difference between the two can be summarized as a difference between relationality and the concern with individual consciousness. James's organizing consciousness is that of the artist in both anecdotes---of his characters coming to him "placed" and the English novelist coming upon a "glimpse" of experience. Wharton flattens the organizing consciousness and the perceiving consciousness, suggesting that the literary representations of space and spatial forms can be used to read the characters responsible for them. If anything a character notices is said to be a "history of [the] soul" of that character, spatial details can be read backwards to reveal the organizing consciousness.

That may go far enough for fixed surroundings such as "a landscape, a street or a house," but when the object in question has been arranged by one of the characters, more elements are in play. Just as the perception of aesthetic details can be used to read the characters responsible for them in Wharton's fiction, so can the interior details she arranges as a novelist be read as the decorative choices of the character responsible for that decoration. When a character is observing the decorative arrangements of another character---especially when all three parties, both characters and the novelist, are consummate decorators---the situation takes on the character of a social interaction. In contrast to the space as purely atmospheric and a facilitator of interaction in *The Portrait of a Lady*, Wharton's decorative treatment of space in *The House of Mirth* is primarily an aesthetic expression of the person responsible for it, not just a frame for or influence on the people it frames. As Wharton herself puts it in a more general writing context, "The novelist works in the very material out of which the object he is trying to render is made. He must use, to express the soul, the signs which soul uses to express itself" (16-7). In this context, Wharton's status as a decorator herself causes her to use decoration to elaborate character. That she writes characters as intimately involved with decorating as she allows her to share not just the decorators eye, but the decorators art: when a drapery is hung or a chair placed, it is quite literally the work of both Wharton and the character responsible for the room. With such an emphasis on the expression of the individual aesthetic mind to build from, Wharton's use of decorative space can be said to be an elaboration of the individual subjectivity rather than the relational subjectivity.

These divergent uses of spatial aesthetics may be clear in their theories of writing, but it remains to be seen how they look in practice. Tracing these types of spatial construction through the two novels will show that architecture and decoration work as both guidelines for action and topics of consideration in themselves.

# James and relational architecture 4-5 pp

Just what James means when he says that when he first sees his characters, he sees them "*placed*" is evident enough from the opening scenes of *Portrait*, in which the construction and narrative manipulation of space is blended. More specifically, elaborating spatial form is a narrative technique James uses to establish character through relationship instead of individual description, even when it does not happen through built structures. Though emphatically not architectural in its setting on the lawn, a sense of place is nevertheless established by the "shadows on the perfect lawn [that] were straight and angular," which establish not only a visual frame for the scene but also create a sense of the momentary: a few moments further into dusk, and the shadows will have changed (17). This opening paragraph almost draws attention to its lack of architecture by concluding with the contemplation of an architectural form, as the not-yet-named elder Touchett "rest[s] his eyes upon the rich red front of his dwelling" (17). Not only is this structure allowed to conclude the opening paragraph rife with elaborate narrations of time and visual shape; it is even allowed to define them after the fact, being deemed "the most characteristic object in the peculiarly English picture I have attempted to sketch" (17-8). James draws attention to his own reference to the object as well as his rendering of it, and as he does so he notably makes the momentary image even more visual than it already was by dubbing it a "picture." The descriptive movement in this opening is from the foreground to the background: the "dense turf" and lengthening shadows make a ground for the briefly situated characters, the propagation of shadows to the image descriptively accumulates objects to the scene, and the house is only introduced as a finale to establish the bounds of the picture. 

When the house is characterized, it is as something that exists but was not created within the novel's purview---something with a history defined by what has passed through it, whether that be the reign of Edward the Sixth, a night's sleep by Elizabeth, or scars of Cromwell's wars (18). Not until the visual and historical details of the house are established is anything specific about the characters touched upon, but even then it is only visual---they remain unnamed but are heavily characterized, primarily visually (18-9). The scene, finally, is not allowed to start until the nature of one relationship is established, but even that is visual: "at this moment, with their faces brought into relation, you would easily have seen they were father and son" (20). These opening pages elaborate by example what James means when he says his characters come to him only when they are "placed." Between the opening and the first lines of dialogue, several levels of framing are established: first atmosphere (through time), then abstract forms and the *presence* of persons (through shadows and movement), and finally a more specific setting (the house). Specific characterization is left secondary to the characterization of place, not the other way around. The sole architectural structure sets the scene, having come about because of influences not traceable to any single person.

The more specific interventions of architectural forms only heighten the sense that built spaces exist in James to facilitate and characterize interactions among characters. The moment of Isabel's first appearance, for example, causes spatial logics, relational logics, and narrative to work in harmony and become blended. When she does appear, it is with an architectural and relational framing:

> [Ralph's] face was turned toward the house, but his eyes were bent musingly on the lawn; so that he had been an object of observation to a person who had just made her appearance in the ample doorway for some moments before he perceived her. (25)

This brief moment is highly reminiscent of the anecdote of the English novelist from "The Art of Fiction": the "moments before he perceived her" are like the moment in which James's novelist comes upon the dining Protestants in an open doorway. The scene Isabel sees, however, is not one that we have access to exactly as she receives it. We are embedded in Ralph's perspective with his "eyes bent musingly on the lawn" when that moment of observation takes place. Two distinct moments of observation are thus established and laid on top of one another. The first, in absentia, is Ralph's observation *by* Isabel, and the second his observation *of* her. The doorway, and more specifically Isabel's appearance framed by it, acts as a container for the relationship contained in that gaze, emphasizing the doubled perspectives that it relies on. The separation that doorway creates creates enough of a temporal divide in their observation of one another that Ralph's doubled awareness---his awareness of Isabel and his awareness of being perceived by her---can be traced directly to it. Not only that, but the doorway as a symbol of entry is at one spatial, narrative, and relational. When she "ma[kes] her appearance," she enters the space, the novel, and Ralph's life. By separating Ralph off from the herd, as it were, and having Isabel appear in the absence of her aunt, James limits the interaction to two people and dramatizes the complicated duplication of the doorway's function.

A very similar structure defines the introduction of Madame Merle. Here, though, sound is introduced as a complicating factor, and the spatial structure needs to be altered to match. Hence the necessity of the various spatial distancing mechanisms James puts in place:

>The drawing-room at Gardencourt was an apartment of great distances, and, as the piano was placed at the end of it furthest removed from the door at which she entered, her arrival was not noticed by the person seated before the instrument. ...[I]t was a lady whom Isabel immediately saw to be a stranger to herself, though her back was presented to the door....By the time she had made these reflexions she became aware that the lady at the piano played remarkably well. (151)

The passive voice of "was placed" makes a glass container in which the logic of James's organization of space can be seen from all angles. Of course, the person who placed it there is James himself, but no narrative proxy exists to place it---unlike, as we shall see, in the case of *The House of Mirth*. These spaces come to be in the moment of their being mentioned. The language additionally reflects James's statement in his preface that when he sees his characters, he "see[s] them *placed*": Madame Merle cannot be defined until she has a stage set for her and a relationship that will correspond with it. The literal distance of the room contains all the metaphorical distance that will be maintained between Isabel and Merle until the latter's true place in the narrative is revealed. But the vastness of the room's layout and the placement of its piano also quite literally enable the genesis of Isabel's one-sided fascination, which will come to define the women's relationship. Only because there is so much distance is Isabel allowed her uninterrupted reverie: "By the time she had made these reflexions" gestures to the necessity of private contemplation for the beauty of the Schubert piece to come into focus, and by extension for her captivation by Madame Merle. Making the space of the drawing room, James makes himself the *narrative* space he needs to establish one of the plot's most important relationships. The more spectatorial nature of this scene in comparison to Isabel's own introduction---again, a function of the distance---anticipates the secrecy of Merle's real intentions. Comparing these two character introductions demonstrates the way space can be used to initiate two very different kinds of relationships.

Besides introducing characters, James's narrative use of space conveys relational information; its unique power as a narrative technique derives from its ability to play off of a narrative (almost visual) perspective momentarily situated in the consciousness of a single character. The perception of one of these spatio-relational complexes therefore comes to the consciousness of the reader in the same moment that it does to the character, encapsulating the entire situation in a single spatial "picture" or "scene." The most dramatic of these moments occurs when Isabel comes upon Merle and Osmond in secret conference in a scene that "str[ikes] her as something detected" (343). In a setup that is, by now, familiar in its echo of James's anecdote of the momentary "glimpse," Isabel pauses "[j]ust beyond the threshold of the drawing-room" because she has "received an impression" from the orientation of Osmond and Merle. It might be said that the silence of the scene or other social cues are what make this incident so suspicious to Isabel. But it is clear that the nature of the communication is ineffable beyond being an "impression," except to point out that the elements of it are visual and spatial. Isabel has her familiar perch in the threshold of a doorway, Madame Merle is "standing on the rug, a little way from the fire," and Osmond is "in a deep chair, leaning back and looking at her"; their relative positions (Merle stands while Osmond sits) could lead to a social explanation, but Isabel rejects this by noting that "they were old friends" (342-3). What communicates the truth to Isabel is the very fact that "the thing made an image, lasting only a moment, like a flicker of light" (343). Imagistic impressions are granted a truth value that transcends what can be gleaned from the social. The way these images are rendered narratively and, one presumes, in the eyes of Isabel, is by the relative orientation of elements in space. The description of Merle and Osmond is most concerned with orienting them with respect to a fixed structure in the room, the fireplace; their relative positions and Osmond's deep-lying glance make a diagonal composition via his line of sight as he looks up at her. As usual, the scene is framed by a sudden entrance, a moment of time *outside* of social relations, and a physical structure. Isabel's placement outside of the intimate space mirrors spatially what she realizes, in a flash, socially: that she is on the outside of this confidence looking in, and that the true social "inside" is just beyond her. As will happen much later in the novel, "the truth of things, their mutual relations, their meaning, and for the most part their horror, r[i]se before her with a kind of architectural vastness" (465). It is not just architectural in its scale, but in its kind. Space is a powerful communicator of social structures such as these that span multiple characters, even as it frames the relationships that nominally define them.

To limit the use of architecture in James's writing and thinking on writing to metaphors of how he structures his novels risks obscuring the way he uses architecture in a more painterly way to organize space in a given scene. Spatial orientation, which is frequently determined by the narrative manipulation of built spaces, often establishes or communicates important information about relational structures. Remarkably, these communications are intelligible to character and reader alike. James's use of "architecture" broadly conceived, then, is frequently a way to communicate a "glimpse" or "impression" of experience that is understood to have a privileged status of reliability.



# Wharton and expressive decorating 4-5 pp

In *The House of Mirth*, the agent-obscuring passive voice of James's "the piano was placed at the end of it furthest removed" is nowhere to be found. The objects placed in Wharton's drawing rooms, and by extension the environments they create, are every bit as linked to the person responsible for placing them there as James's are anonymous facilitators of relationality and truth. As early as Selden's jibe that when he does come to visit Lily at her Aunt Peniston's "it's not to look at Mrs. Peniston's furniture," decoration carries with it a statement about the decorator responsible (9). And Selden's own apartment, described in the passage leading up to his quip, are just as expressive about him: the "slip of a hall hung with old prints," his "letters and notes heaped on the table among his gloves and sticks," his "small library, dark but cheerful," and his "shabby leather chairs" characterize Selden almost as fully as a passage of pure description would (8). Selden can be read in his possessions, and so can Lily in her interpretation of them---of the chairs as "shabby" and the space as "cheerful." Their relationship as would-be lovers separated indelibly by the difference in their material tastes and aspirations is settled well before the cake is served. 

Decoration is the overriding presence in Wharton's novel, and its narrative (and social) uses are distinguished both by the reading of decorated spaces and their construction. Selden's case is in many ways representative of the trend, except that his bachelor's apartment is an anomalous space in a novel more obviously concerned with ornate and highly designed manors. A more representative, if contrasting, pair would be rooms designed by Mrs. Peniston and Mrs. Dorset. While Lily is at first relieved to discover that "Mrs. Peniston's opulent interior was at least not externally dingy," she quickly discovers that "dinginess is a quality which assumes all manner of disguises" and that "it was as latent in the expensive routine of her aunt's life as in the makeshift existence of a continental pension" (31). It is not just the appearance that matter's in one's choice of decorating, then; the routines are just as telling of one's character. The regularity and religious observance with which Mrs. Peniston rotates the linens and redecorates at the end of summer represents to Lily the height of this routine dinginess, apparently because it is so financially conservative and expresses so little (characteristics that appear to correlate quite closely) (78). In contrast to this almost funereal, Victorian dinginess, Lily admires and is rejuvenated by the more opulent (and implicitly wasteful) decorations of Mrs. Dorset:

>Everything in her surroundings ministered to feelings of ease and amenity....There was nothing new to Lily in these tokens of a studied luxury; but, though they formed a part of her atmosphere, she never lost her sensitiveness to their charm. Mere display left her with a sense of superior distinction; but she felt an affinity to all the subtler manifestations of wealth. (34)

The "tokens of a studied luxury" establish a state that exists beyond them, exhibiting something more fundamental in the person arranging them. Although they are "manifestations of wealth," they are specified as the "*subtler*" manifestations of it, suggesting, with "studied," the art that goes into the "charm." This moment of reveling in her surroundings appears to establish an ideal for Lily, the decorative pinnacle to which she aspires. The success of this decoration appears to be measured by the extent to which it heightens in the connoisseur "a sense of superior distinction." The designed space becomes a collaboration between the arranger and the observer.

Both of these passages also illustrate the extent to which this particular aesthetic and social interaction is, as much as anything, an extension of wealth. While Wharton's use of decorated space is as a fundamentally expressive and social vehicle, it is a feature much more embedded in economic, gender, and social relations than the apparently spontaneously occurring spaces that animate (but do not participate in) James's social interactions. Decoration in Wharton enters a network of facts and situations surrounding---even determining---the nature of a character, a network that includes social conditions and inequalities.

With this in mind, one is able to see the more economic and gendered plot lines of *House of Mirth* manifested in the domestic and decorative descriptions. Lily's economic status and the freedom of self-expression this entails, for example, can be measured in the extent to which she is able to control the space around her. The inability to decorate as one pleases marks, retrospectively, the beginning of Lily's descent into the threat of dire straits that defines the narrative. When Lily's father becomes financially ruined, it is announced by her sudden inability to correct the problem of fading flowers, a problem it would cost twelve dollars a day to fix (27-8). The inability to control a space absolutely is imbued with all the tragedy of financial ruination, is though the freedom to do so were the ultimate point of wealth. And indeed, in Lily's eyes, it may be. It appears to be so in the extent to which many of the novel's defining conflicts are expressed in terms of their effect on the ability to decorate. An apparent joke between Lily and Selden overstates the centrality of decorating to Lily's aspirations, but perhaps it is not as overstated as it would be with reference to a character other than Lily Bart. The exchange happens while they discuss an aborted engagement:

> "Oh, his mother was frightened---she was afraid I should have all the family jewels reset. And she wanted me to promise that I wouldn't do over the drawing-room."
> "The very thing you are marrying for!"
> "Exactly. So she packed him off to India." (10)

Just how much of Lily's machinations have the avoidance of "dinginess" and the ability to refresh flowers as their ultimate goal is difficult to assess. But certainly the primal scene of the flowers and the dread of having to live with a setting whose taste is in any way compromised seems to provide a motivation for many of Lily's actions. The desire to "do over the drawing room" seems to be a fundamental aspect of self-expression for Lily, whose aspirations elsewhere to "arrange her life as she pleased" are specified as having "smarter gowns than Judy Trenor, and far, far more jewels than Bertha Dorset" (41). To "arrange" is an act that refers to the construction of space and the act of self-determination at the same time.

The *tableaux vivants* in which Lily participates demonstrate this continuum of decorating and self-expression as clearly as one could wish, exposing as they do so a complicated middle-ground between aestheticism, social relations, and personal beauty. It is a scene in which the boundaries between person and domestic environment, aestheticism and self-construction, and subject and object are dramatically destabilized. By turning the decorating impulse onto herself as a way of making herself into an art object, Lily definitively establishes decorating as a hybrid artistic and social form, revealing the logic of decoration that has been animating Wharton's spatial descriptions throughout. Here, Lily extends the consideration of what goes into her physical self-expression to her surroundings, thereby appropriating those surroundings as aspects of her wider self: in the tableaux, "her vivid plastic sense, hitherto nurtured on no higher food than dress-making and upholstery, found eager expression in the disposal of draperies, the study of attitudes, the shifting of lights and shadows" (103). Dress-making, upholstery, and "the disposal of draperies" are united as aspects of a single sensibility, which allows her to incorporate the "attitudes" of her own posture into the creation of an atmospheric aesthetic. The moment of display is a moment in which Lily becomes atmospheric in her own right, in which her own beauty becomes coextensive with the ambient decorative aesthetic. This is most clearly expressed in the distinction it "was as though she had stepped, not out of, but into, Reynolds' canvas, banishing the phantom of his dead beauty by the beams of her living grace" (106). By sinking into the canvas she becomes part of the decorative framing of the social event that the entire tableau merely provides an occasion for; at the same time, the tableau occasions more frank social interactions as a decorative piece than would be possible in regular conversation, occasioning too-frank outbursts from Ned Van Alstyne on Lily's figure. The confusion of social and aesthetic expressions captures the liminal space that the decorative arts always inhabit, as accessories to life and aesthetic arrangements simultaneously. Lily achieves her full effect most distinctly when the cultivation of personal beauty, decorative effect, and social graces unite in the vessel of the *tableau vivant*.

In comparison to James's use of space, then, in which visual and spatial forms frame, facilitate, and influence, but never directly particpate in, social interactions, Wharton's decorative use of space also serves as a means by which the characters express themselves and respond to the expressions of others. That we see Wharton's own decorative sense manifested most clearly in the spatial readings and constructions of her characters is perhaps a mark of the way that she identifies with her characters: she creates her worlds using them as proxies, and as such shares a decorative an aesthetic sense with them. The sense of a description as a "history of a soul" that she outlines in her theory of writing causes her to identify with her characters on a ground determined by their own shared passions. Furthermore, this communication between author and character is extended to encompass the character-character and even reader-character relationships: precisely because of the coextensive constructions of space and self, decoration is taken as an extension of the person responsible for it, and in the readings of space we get the clearest articulations of the characters responsible for reading and creating a given space. In this way space becomes a double medium: it is shared by characters and author alike.

# Conclusion 1-2 pp

The divergent uses of constructed narrative space that I have identified in *The Portrait of a Lady* and *The House of Mirth* characterize a larger distinction between the authors of the two novels, specifically the way they approach the construction of character. The famously relational approach to subjectivity that has been widely noted in James's novels determines the way he manipulates the physical settings of interactions. In contrast, the tension in Wharton between the spontaneous expression of desires and the careful cultivation of self that remain so impossible to reconcile throughout the novel only becomes further complicated in decorative self-expression, which attains the invisibility of comfort in its ideal state but requires a studied application of principles to acquire that state. Beneath these differences in the two authors' construction of character and space alike, there lies a more fundamental disagreement about whether the basic unit of subjectivity is the relation or the individual. These readings of space, then, are unlikely to go against the grain of much criticism but the previous readings of space that seem to ignore the literal for the metaphorical architectures in James and unite architecture and interior design in Wharton. In studying novelists as concerned with narrative spatial construction as these, however, it is important to attend to both the theoretical basis of their use of spatial design and its narrative applications---which do correspond, as demonstrated above, but in unexpected ways. 

[^1]: Liisa Stephenson's "Decorating Fiction: Edith Wharton's Literary Architecture" is addressed more fully below. Judith Fryer's *Felicitious Space* focuses on the floorplan of Wharton's home as a proxy for decoration, and discusses the library of Bellomont as a private space to emphasize the modular nature of her preferred home design (55-75). Both seem to me to dangerously conflate the two as they appear in fiction. The key difference, as I will argue more closely in reading *The House of Mirth*, is that architecture is an aesthetic primarily of containment while decorating is a more expressive medium. The latter retains the sense of aesthetic agency that the former obscures.


Some quotes:

"To James, then, 'form' seems to be a shape or 'frame'-it limits and encloses the subject, surrounds the scene, determines the scope-and a position, a distance or angle, a vantage point, what we more often think of as literary or narrative technique" (185) Ellen Eve Frank (qtd. in Machlan)

"In Portrait, houses do not only set the scene; they suggest a course of action." Machlan. But need they do one or the other? Seems to undercut the relational aspects of James's characters