---
author: Phillip Polefrone
title: The Space of Things&#58; Global Circulation, Materiality, and Environment in *Through the Arc of the Rain Forest*
date: December 21, 2014
coursename: Postcolonial Ecologies
profname: Professor Jennifer Wenzel
---

by visually representing the novel in this way, I hope to show the failure of place narrowly understood in accounting for the novel. In other words, that the characters have to be understood as not just individuals, but also the objects that they put into circulation, or that put *them* into circulation, or that otherwise extend the boundaries of the individual in some way. This vision of prosthetic humanity that the novel puts forward, I'll argue, is the only way to reconcile the coincidence of economic-slash-environmental calamity with the resolution on the human narrative.

#Space, Material, Things

In Zygmunt Bauman's "Living (Occasionally Dying) in an Urban World," he presents a conception of space that has emerged with---and may be coextensive with---globalization and global capitalism. Extending Maneul Castells's "space of flows," he puts his focus on the spatial dimension "where global powers reside and operate," in which 

>it is the *speed of movement and facility to escape*, not the size of *territorial possessions* (and so responsibilities), that count and decide.… New empires are not of this world---not of earthly, geographical world, not of the "space of places." (112)

Although his focus here is primarily on territoriality itself, his "space of flows" can also provide a way to discuss materiality in terms both of spatial understanding, and in the context of a global market. Is the international object, which is built in one place specifically to be shipped to and used in another, the same as the object used by the person who builds it, and which is used primarily where it was built? If territorial possession is anathema to global power, what about the possessions that define the territory? In Bauman's primarily geographical account of the space of flows, a more fundamental view of power and materiality remains unstated, but is nevertheless constitutive. Namely, that global power is greater the less it is constrained by individual materiality. Put another way: power can increase to a global scale only to the extent that it can operate without material limitations.

Much of the discussion around Castells's original concept, including Castells's own,^[Footnote 2009 article] has centered on "cyberspace" as a new spatial paradigm and a way "that the material arrangements allow for simultaneity of social practices without territorial contiguity" (Castells 295). To place emphasis exclusively on information technologies and increasingly territory-agnostic social practices is to risk missing a more fundamental dematerializing operation that, while intimately related to technological progress, is not exclusively defined by it. It would not be correct to simplify this dematerializing force and name it "capitalism" either; nevertheless, Marx did not need an E-Trade account to write, "All that is solid melts into air." Commodity logic has dematerialization built into it as the spectral side of value, and as such the turn away from material, even if it is a turn to "social practices," can be fruitfully understood through the filter of material things. We might add to Arjun Appadurai's interaction of the five "scapes"---ethnoscapes, technoscapes, finanscapes, mediascapes, and ideoscapes---another element: the "commodiscape" or the global circulation of material commodities. Just as the other five scapes are mutually necessary to understand global flows because "global flows occur…*in and through the growing disjunctures between*" them, the commodiscape also participates in and disjoints the multiscape of globalization. After all, commodities are *material* in their usefulness as objects, but they are also *financial* in their exchange value and their financialization as commodities futures. They are *technological* in the means of their production and the increasingly technological elements of the things themselves. They are *affective* insofar as they are responsible for our non-market attachments to them.^[See Bill Brown's misuse value, discussed below? ()] They are *mediatized* and *ideological* in their use as images of mass culture and nationalism (think of the Ford, the "pigskin"). Finally, and crucially for my purposes, commodities are *environmental* in the way their use and disposal (un-use) impacts the material flows, the ecological substratum that gets ignored in commodity exchange but without which there is nothing. The *space of things* sits in between the space of flows and the space of places: things, like people, get caught up in flows and are all the more powerful the less they are rooted to a particular territory (the "global brand"), but they do come from some *place*. And just as important on a full planet, they end up someplace.

Karen Tei Yamashita's *Through the Arc of the Rainforest* can be read as a surreal, comedic, but nonetheless sophisticated demonstration of a similar principal, as globalism's relationship to space is mirrored in the novel's treatment of circulation. Another layer of complexity is added, however, in the relationship of people to things, and the way this relationship mediates human interaction with larger systems in the multiscape of global flows. This mediation is allowed to be unusually literal because of the novel's fantastical conceit. Each of the characters has an externalized component of themselves that acts as both commodity and prosthesis: Kazumasa Ishimaru has a plastic ball from space floating in front of his forehead that reacts to material peculiarities; Batista and Tania Aparecida Djapan have a special connection with courier-pigeons that leads to a global communication network; Mané Pena's love of feathers and expertise regarding their "therapeutic" use come to define him, consuming the other parts of his life; Chico Paco's quest to objectify his spirituality in an altar leads him to establish a pilgrimage network and eventually a radio network; J. B. Tweep has a fully-functional third arm that, increasing his efficiency and propeling him up the corporate ladder, causes him to become coextensive with and augmented by the GGG Corporation. Especially in later sections, characters move *in absentia* through the circulation of these prosthetic additions, making the majority of their interaction with the global multiscape in some way commidity-mediated. 

In this sense, the novel sets up a version of the "commodiscape" I have appended to Appadurai's list of scapes, but it does so with an explicit focus on the human role in each. More specifically, it considers the effects of dematerializing global flows on the human side of the commodisphere: the characters begin to understand *things* primarily in terms of exchange, movement, and *networks* of circulation, a shift that influences their understanding of themselves and the rest of the world. 

At the same time, this immaterial view of objects is accompanied by a kind of push-back from everything that is lost when the material substratum of exchange is ignored. The Matacão, almost a character itself, is the most obvious example: it is an underground, impenetrable mass of congealed plastic, with either magnetic or magical properties, and it results from the kind of waste-production that is only possible by ignoring (on a massive scale) the material basis of consumption. When Matacão is used as a material for the production of commodities, waste, the product of ignoring the material, is turned into the very material basis of exchange. An apex of obliviousness to material is attained when what seems like recycling is mobilized by the profit motive. Waste goes global as contagion, naturalized destruction. When material interchanges are ignored, they demonstrate their own importance by a disjuncture of their own, one so radical that it negates all others. Yamashita's representation of this continual push and pull---with market forces dematerializing everything on one hand and the material, natural basis of *things* reasserting itself in response---boils down to an ethical stance that privileges *attention to materiality* over the immateriality that comes with global circulation. *Through the Arc of the Rainforest*'s version of globalism therefore affirms the premises of Castell's, Bauman's, and Appadurai's versions of global flows while offering a critical environmental intervention: that beneath these flows there is a more basic material system of things, materials, and ecologies without which no flows (or anything else) exist, and that certain types of "disjuncture" put this material basis at risk.

#Kazumasa: Objectified Labor and Human Circulation

For the majority of the novel, such a lofty, global reading would seem well out of reach. Like the soap operas that Yamashita's preface compares it to, the novel concerns itself with people and their relationships, not the abstract circulation of things or statements about capital and the environment. These arguments, if we can call them that, exist in the seams between reality and her imaginative world, especially in the construction of the object-appendages and the Matacão. The ball floating in front of Kazumasa's forehead is the most narratively significant (and not just because it is the narrator of the novel) and receives the most attention. It is also unique among the objects in the novel, however, in the way it synthesizes material interactions, human integration with systems, and movement.

A great deal of emphasis is placed, from the beginning, on the ball's material: it is made out of a plastic-like material, something similar to (or at least that reacts to) the stuff of the Matacão. Almost as much attention is given to how it comes to define Kazumasa. Although it has fallen from the sky, it has attached itself to him permanently, so permanently that, by implication, the only way to take it from him is by killing him. It is not until Kazumasa grows up---enters the labor force, we might say---that his object-appendage begins to mediate his movement and economic relationships. When he does enter the labor force, his ball gets him a job specifically because of its material peculiarity. Because this unique material is at first inherently tied to motion---it starts to be attracted to weaknesses in railroad tracks---its peculiar nature also puts *Kazumasa* in motion. The effects of this prosthetic object are visible in the increase of his sphere of influence. The beginning of his life is narrowly confined to a scale consistent with the powers of his unaugmented body. 

**1Japan0**

The moment his abilities are extended by the object that is augmenting him, though---the moment in which the ball becomes a prosthetic---the extent of his influence expands. 

**1Japan1**

The geographic boundaries of his movement are carefully delineated to emphasize this increase: it is made very clear that he is traveling from Hokkaido, the northernmost portion of Japan, to Nagasaki, which is located in the south (cite). 

Is Kazumasa put into motion or put into circulation? Circulation in the sense I mean relies on exchange, and more specifically the exchange of commodities---objects that are products of labor and are both used and exchanged. Kazumasa's ball is not a product of labor, nor is it exchanged, and therefore the *ball* cannot be taken as a commodity in itself. More precisely, it is a prosthetic portal to the commodiscape. The ball is his only way of performing the labor by which he supports himself, because it is the part of him that responds to the track weaknesses. In a sense unique to the novel, then, Kazumasa's labor power is externalized---objectified in the ball. Though the ball may not be a commodity in itself, it is, in part, a way of physicalizing Kazumasa's commodified labor power. 

It is possible to extend this reading too far. To do so would risk a reductive, allegorical reading of the ball as only (and entirely) commodified labor. Lest we forget, the ball is also the narrator of the novel, and in other contexts it defines his identity---at certain points he is just "The Japanese with the ball" (cite). While such a reading would diverge from the novel, a qualified version of it is essential to the interaction of human, thing, and globalization it depicts: the ball acts as a commodification of labor insofar as it mediates Kazumasa's economic relations. 

Understanding Kazumasa's ball as his labor power externalized can also add some useful context to the conditions of his increasing obsolescence as a railroad maintainer, especially as this obsolescence relates to the extent of his sphere of influence. It is significant that, when Kazumasa eventually loses his position with the railroad company, it is because a new, bigger company has taken over that *replicates his ball exactly* with a *mechanical device* that looks suspiciously like his ball (8). With the ball understood as externalized labor power, the one-for-one replacement of human labor by its mechanical equivalent is imagined as the mechanical reproduction of an object. The result of this replacement is a decrease in the geographical extent of Kazumasa's influence. He is fired, which results "a considerable cut in pay" and a major curtailment of the distance he travels per day (8). 

**1Japan2**

In the first place, a relationship is established here that persists throughout: geographic influence correlates with economic power, as seen here in that fact that a diminution of distance covered per day leads to a wage cut. But the mechanization of Kazumasa's ball has a further-reaching effect on Kazumasa as a human. Just as his ball enters a larger system of essentially mechanical objects, Kazumasa himself becomes, to some extent, mechanical. His circulation in the new system has a strict, regulated period, and the task has all the mindless repetition so characteristic of work within an extensive division of labor. A similar diminution of Kazumasa as an individual occurs later, when the ball has again been mass-produced, but this time as a fashion accessory (148). In both cases, the characteristics of the ball's circulation in a larger system of objects determines the character of Kazumasa's own interaction with larger systems. This is true whether those systems are economic, cultural, or social. It is no surprise that Kazumasa's diminishing status causes him to flee Japan for another locale: São Paulo. 

**Brazil Kazumasa's arrival** 

To change the role of his defining object is to change the way he himself fits into the systems of which he is a part.

Finally, Kazumasa's ball stands in not just for Kazumasa's own labor objectified, but also, in its increasing significance to global and environmental affairs, for the increase of human labor power entire. The stepwise increase in scale---from the local scale of environmental alteration, to the national scale of transportation networks, to the global scale of resource extraction and distribution---encapsulates the increasing environmental influence of *the* human in the story of *an* augmented human. When the focus of Kazumasa's labor changes from railroad tracks to deposits of Matacão around the world, the scale of his material intervention increases to the extent of the globe. His own potential influence becomes coextensive with the GGG Corporation's aspirations.

**GGG's Aspirational Network**

In the first place, linking Kazumasa's subsumption by corporate interest to globality points to the inherence of capitalism and global extraction: national borders are transcended as the nation becomes irrelevant as a global source of power. Bauman might point out that the nation becomes irrelevant in part because of its territoriality, the inability to supersede itself without major acts of military conquest; the super-territorial, transnational corporation can expand without needing a redefinition and without material hindrance. The focus on Matacão, though, suggests an understanding of increasing human labor power in terms of its geological effect. As Dipesh Chakrabarty points out in "The Climate of History: Four Theses," "We [the human species] may not experience ourselves as a geological agent, but we appear to have become one at the level of the species" (221). Chakrabarty's topic is anthropegenic climate change, but in Yamashita's hands the human intervention in planetary geological workings is understood more broadly. The mechanism of interference is, first, waste production in the creation of the Matacão; later, it becomes extraction when Matacão becomes a resource. The most significant difference is, again, that this geological interference occurs at the hands of the augmented individual. Presenting it as such incorporates the expansion of human labor into the narrative of an individual's increasing labor power. It also makes the prosthetic commodity, the objectification of labor power, the means by which the *experience* of geological influence is narrated. Chakarabarty may be right to say that, in the normal course of human life, we do not "experience ourselves as a geological agent," but Yamashita's imaginative novel is not narrating the normal course of human life. The object-appendage, as a window to the commodiscape through labor, makes this geological effect apprehensible experientially to the individual.

Kazumasa's may be the main narrative thread, and it is the most unique in the way that the object-appendage works as an objectification of labor. It is not representative, however, of the object-appendage in general in the novel. The following section will show what happens when circulation occurs in the absence of---or causes the destruction of---the object that motivates it.

#Circulation Without Object

Circulation seems like it should require some *thing* to be circulated, but this common-sense intuition not only does not hold true, but is neatly reversed in *Through the Arc of the Rainforest*. More accurately, *Through the Arc of the Rainforest* demonstrates that this common-sense intuition does not hold true in general: think of the reduction of a commodity to "futures," which are just promises to buy a given amount of a given *thing* sometime in the future; think of the increasingly automated and always-higher-speed trade in stocks.^[cite this better, some footnoted examples?] The novel literalizes something that is already happening, and has been happening since the beginning of finance capitalism: the dematerialization of things, exultant ignorance of use and materiality in favor of exchange and ephemerality. "All that is solid melts into air." 

Of course, it could be said that yoking this dematerializing tendency to financialization may make it too recent. Following the classical Marxist line, commodity logic has an inherently immaterial aspect in its very nature. The opening pages of *Capital* establish a split between the use-value of a commodity and its exchange-value, with use-value being broadly aligned with materiality and exchange-value with the spectral value established through comparison and trade. Commodity fetishism is in part the confusion of exchange-value with something inherently material. The difference between this already-somewhat-dematerialized nature of the commodity and the process of dematerialization through finance is a difference of degree, not of kind. When commodities traders can theoretically purchase enough cattle to feed a country without seeing (or conceivably ever having seen) a cow, that is somethign different. It is more different still when an automatic trading algorithm can do so without being *able* to see, or think, a cow. Without emphasizing the technological mechanism (it did not exist in 1990), this is the kind of dematerialization that Yamashita puts in the hands of global circulation.

It should come as no surprise, then, that the narrative key by which this logic is established comes in a financial context. GGG, the corporation founded by Georgia and Geoffrey Gamble that finances J. B. Tweep's large-scale harvesting of Matacão, exists solely on the basis of this kind of circulation, and provides the model by which it can be understood. Like the novel itself, GGG is a kind of terrarium containing constant motion. Its workers are constantly rushing around smoking, yelling at each other, moving things from room to room, and copying documents that refer to nothing: 

> representative block quote (57)

This activity differs from the common-sense business-as-usual in one important sense: it produces nothing; it has no object. Several times in the J. B. Tweep sections of the novel, a great plan or realization is mentioned on the basis of which the Gambles started their business, but it is never clear entirely what that is. **quote** After being sacked by the shareholders, Geoffrey and Georgia destroy a small "card" that appears to be the object at the center of the business, or at least some regulating mechanism. Twice it is referred to as a "microchip," but this is the same as making it a non-thing: an unspecified microchip is scarcely an object in itself, more a symbol of the immateriality of the virtual.^[some page numbers?] The important point is that this object, though it is at the center of GGG, is entirely unessential to the company's continuation. Nobody but Georgia and Geoffrey even know the object exists, and everything continues without it. The genius of GGG's founders lies, at bottom, in this unnecessary central symbol. It is understanding precisely that the object itself is eminently unimportant in relation to the conditions of its exchange, hence the ability of the company to "probably go on almost forever without" the "missing product" that Georgia and Geoff Gamble destroy on their way out of the firm (21). Without this card, a minor, largely forgotten department of the company is left to do the work of finding something to produce with the right specifications of profitability. This task, however, is understood to never be possible until the intervention of J. B. Tweep: **quote**. Because they have invented a company that does not even have to pretend to create something with use-value, a parade of cloned, identical functionaries photocopying their resumes is sufficient to its continuation. The existence of the company does not only not depend on production, its insularity and inward-looking nature prevent production.

The relationship of this company to J. B. Tweep is predictably bizarre and inherently related to appendage and augmentation: Tweep has a fully-functioning third arm, which, as a symbol and cause of the efficiency that makes him the driving force of the company, makes the GGG corporation act as a prosthesis to Tweep in itself. Corporation as prosthesis, like the dematerialization inherent to commodity circulation in general, is something basic to economic reality that the novel extends to the point of illustrative absurdity. The idea of a company as *corporation*, embodiment, already implies the radical extension of the individuals involved through a communal structure, augmenting the powers of each. Logically, a figure at the head of such an augmentative community would have a privileged relationship to this *corpus*, and in a strictly hierarchical system, it would be possible to see the corporation as the extended body of the individual in charge. J. B. Tweep's situation is unique in that he is emphatically not in charge, at one point pointing out to his three-breasted wife Michelle that advancing in the institutional structure would cause a threat to his privileged position with respect to the powers of the company: **quote**. Nevertheless, Tweep's third arm leads him symbolically and literally to the site of the company's true material power, the product room. **quote about it being the most important department in the company** The result of Tweep's self-augmentation through the company (again, via his literal appendage) is twofold. First, his movement is allowed to be totally unrestricted, consistent with the globalism of the company's influence and interests: he gains the power to move not only himself, but other characters more or less at will. 
**map?**
Second, his powers of material transformation inflate to the point that he is able to turn the Matacão seemingly overnight into a base of operations for GGG---and also, therefore, for himself. Increasing extent of influence correlates to increasing powers of material change---the ability to make the material world malleable, and in a sense, less materially fixed.
**map just tweep side of capital flow?**
The flow of capital becomes a part of Tweep's augmented power as a part of his extension by the corporation. If Kazumasa's ball is in part an objectification of his commodified labor, Tweep's arm is in part an encapsulation of power extended through augmentation. This extended power expresses itself in the ability to make Matacão, the most material of the novel's fantasies, into a reflection of the thing that changes it. Such malleability undermines the fixity of material, making material essentially reflective of ideal.^[Hegelian echoes are intentional here, etc.]

The other two examples of circulation itself undermining material fixity rely on the novel's alignment of certain types of affective relationship with materiality. Chico Paco's spiritual narrative is in many ways the more obvious of the two: from the beginning, his religiosity is expressed through materiality and territorial rootedness. First, the beginning of Chico Paco's life as an almost sanctified figure comes from an affective relationship to a character who is made overtly territory-rooted by virtue of not being able to walk---a trope that recurs in the novel. Although the pilgrimage technically begins because Gilberto is newly *able* to walk, his weakness is emphasized and he remains a figure of immobility throughout (27). More to the point of objectifying spirituality, the goal of his original pilgrimage is to establish a shrine to St. George, which in context of the rest of the characters' object-relations can be taken as an objectification^[Objectification, again, does not mean commodification.] of faith. The elements of this shrine are also consciously thing-based, physicalizations of the concepts the shrine contains: Chico Paco sets off "armed with the *handwritten* prayers of Dona Maria Creuza *on small pieces of tablet paper*, a *rosary*, a *locket of Gilberto's hair*, [and] a *small statue* of Saint George" (27, my emphasis). Unlike Tweep's rapid, effortless, capital-driven transformation of the Matacão, Chico Paco's is "more difficult than…expected," requiring him to pay "the most attention to the base…to which everything had to be nailed and cemented" (49). The objects of which the shrine consists also cause it to be irremediably territorial; the combination fo territorialization and materiality in turn links thingness with Chico Paco's affective relationship to Gilberto. When an attempt is made to remove it, the extent of its material adherence to the Matacão becomes clear: "The bulldozer grunted and smoked angirly, but it could not push the shrine over" (50). Miles away, Gilberto responds sympathetically, linked to the Matacão through Chico Paco's immaterial affections: as the bulldozer strains against the immovable force of the Matacão, "Gilberto tottered to one side, but he did not fall" (50). This is only the clearest example of a trend that persists throughout: affective relationships become aligned with material, and become material themselves in the way they respond to other material shifts.

The dematerialization that marks Chico Paco's narrative can be understood as the progress from several initial poles of rootedness in the first section to several poles of dematerialization, uprootedness, and commodification in the final sections. Comparing the contrasting vision of the Matacão at the moment of establishing the shrine to how it actually ends up in Chico Paco's narrative illustrates the point neatly. Supporters of the shrine initially "envisio[n] a Matacão cluttered with altars and relics, plastic flowers in porcelain vases and peddlers selling candles and rosaries," an extension of the object-based materiality of Chico Paco's original spiritual quest (49). On the other pole, and the other end of the novel, this vision becomes instead "Chicolándia," and amusement park funded by Tweep and GGG. In addition to the obvious commodification of Chico Paco's legacy, this development of the rooted shrines into an amusement park is closely aligned with the dematerializing tendencies of global flows and capital circulations. Whereas the shrines are inherently tied to place, Chicolándia has a globalizing purpose: Tweep describes it as "the perfect way to introduce the new technology of Matacão plastic to the world," making it not only a global location in itself but also a means of globalizing the stuff of its location. Matacão itself also changes from its form early in Chico Paco's narrative, a symbol of territorialization through the shrine, to its form in Tweep's narrative, as the unfixed, malleable material that adheres to ideal forms. 

The progress from one pole to the next is a progress of gradual increasing scale and dispersion, or dematerialization, of Chico Paco as an individual. The first pilgrimage is on foot, unaugmented by any technology, and is unidirectional. 
**1MovementBrazil1.jpeg**
In the progress from Part I to Part IV, Chico Paco's fame as a pilgrim and a holy figure keep him in motion, to the point that the single pilgrimages develop into circuits of there-and-back motion.
**2Brazil0.jpeg**
Circuit becomes network when Chico Paco starts Radio Chico. Again increasing extent of influence coincides with dematerialization, as what was foot traffic turns into radio wave. Chico Paco is still at the center of it, and the radio station acts as an extension of his spiritual mission.
**4PilgrimNet0.jpeg**
Gradually, as demand increases and more and more letters come in, Chico Paco's task is distributed by volunteer pilgrims who effectively distribute Chico Paco not only across territory (through the radio waves) but also across individuals. As in Tweep's case, organization becomes augmentation of the individual through other individuals: "In a matter of weeks, Chico Paco surrogates were marching forth from every possible place in Brazil" (129).
**4PilgrimNet1.jpeg**
It is significant that this expansion across the nation and Chico Paco's augmentation through dispersion are the means of dematerialization in his thread of the novel, because both are the result of the human entering an expanded circulation through prosthesis, as with Kazumasa and Tweep. At the same time, the objects to which Chico Paco relates are even less commodities than was Kazumasa's ball. Just as Kazumasa's ball was the commodification of his labor power, though, Chico Paco's relationship to objects can be understood as the commodification of spirituality and affective relationships. 

Many of the same points can be made about Batista and Tania Aparecida Djapan's narrative, but it is hardly necessary to do so in detail. The link between affective relationships and materiality persists in that the increasing scale of their pigeon communication network causes the dissolution of Tania and Batista's marriage and the other aspects of Batista's life, like passionate opinions on topics and soccer, are implicitly glorified. Activities like the ones they both lose through their extension and dispersion among their pigeons are restored in part by the novel's conclusion: when the Matacão has disappeared, the space where it was has been taken up as a soccer pitch and everything returns to the simple, localized activities that characterized it before. In general, the same pattern of expansion and dematerialization prevails. The initial pigeon network, like Kazumasa's original network, is local.
**1PigeonNetworkSP0**
The lines in black mark public transportation lines in São Paulo. These lines make it possible to pinpoint where Tania tries to abandon the first pigeon when Batista becomes too attached to it.
**1PigeonNetworkSP1**
Tania's attempt can be seen, in part, as a prefiguration of circulation's destruction of the object of circulation, but with an interesting reversal. Her attempted abandonment is actually the event that initiates the increase of the network. The presence of investment extends the network further, but the network is still contained within the more basic structures of Tania's and Batista's lives and relationship:
**1PigeonNetworkSP2**
The expansion of the network coincides with the centralization of several networks, namely, the merging of the pigeon network with the Chico Paco's pilgrim circuit. 
**4Networks0**
Centralization quickly leads to internationalism, as one lone pigeon struggles to the revolving door of GGG corporation.
**4Networks1.jpeg**
When the pigeon network extends across the Atlantic, the fundaments of Tania and Batista's life give way as they are divided beyond reason. 
**5NetworksWorld1_all.jpeg**
The network they have built together exceeds the knowledge of Batista as a representative of the individual---it finally leaves him behind, the extension of his original influence increasing to the point that what is most basic to his life dissolves. 

These three threads and the expansion that each narrates have obvious differences, but across the three a pattern is discernible. Constantly increasing scale of circulation destroys the thing that is circulated. Exchange, more than ignoring use, disables use when it reaches a certain extent and speed. The famous commodity split is resolved, but not by unification; exchange finally wins out. This is the mechanism by which material is definitively supressed, and which sets the stage for the environmental crisis of the novel's conclusion.

#Naturalizing Crisis

Where the *space of things* stands now: things, objects serve as mediators of and portals to the commodiscape for Yamashita's characters, and the expanding role of any of the many object-appendages leads to the simultaneous expanding influence and material dissolution of the character to whom it is appended. Material dissolution has thus far been presented in opposition to rootedness, attention to materiality, and stabilizing affective relationships (familial or romantic). There is a more basic sense of materiality that undergirds these ones, though, material environment, and it is here that the novel makes its final intervention, to which the other materialities lead. This development has a clear logic to it. The expansion of the characters' extent of influence to the entire globe culminates in environmental crisis. When the planet *runs out* for them, in other words, is when materiality finally starts to reassert itself through environment, against the dematerializing trend of the novel to that point. 

To the extent that increasing scale leads to the characters "running out" of planet, the narrative of expansion can be correlated to the real-world crisis of a full planet. As Bauman points out in *Wasted Lives*, the full planet crisis is inherently tied to crises of waste production and disposal:

> The planet, however, is now full. That means, among other things, that typically modern processes such as order-building and economic progress take place everywhere and so everywhere 'human waste' is produced and turned out in ever rising quantities---this time, however, in the absence of 'natural' refuse tips suitable for its storage and potential recycling. (69)

The Matacão is a product of exactly this kind of crisis, a revelation on which the novel almost resolves narratively. It has congealed, scientists discover, from "landfills of nonbiodegradable material buried under virtually every populated part of the Earth" and traveled beneath "the lower layers of the Earth's mantle" until it reached the few remaining "virgin areas of the Earth," of which the Amazon Forest is said to be "one of the last" (202). This emphasis on the waning of "virgin" areas of the planet establishes that the Matacão is a full-planet problem *par excellence*: extending to the final crevices of undeveloped territory is *naturalized* here, not even as a product of the human species but as a natural response to human species. This kind of waste and its interaction with natural systems presents yet another sense in which the object is the mediating extension of the human into systems larger than the individual. Modern human existence itself has waste production as a concomitant, and this waste production is the means by which the human intervenes in geological processes. 

Considering waste as an object bearing a similar relationship to humans as those discussed above opens waste up to consideration along the use/exchange divide; this is not to commodify waste in and of itself, but to open it up to consideration in terms of material use---here we might say material effect more generally---and the unlikely possibility of its exchange. Unlikely, but, clearly, not impossible, especially in Yamashita's hands. Mané Pena's narrative of the commodification of feathers demonstrates a shift of the material basis of commodities from extracted material to waste material in precisely these terms. His harvesting of "magic feathers," which are rubbed behind one's ear for unspecified therapeutic purposes, is originally a manipulation of natural materials subject to scarcity. When J. B. Tweep discovers these feathers, though---they are the missing "product" that GGG has been searching for and unable to find without Tweep's third arm and all that it represents---they are entered into global circulation (**cite**). As they do, the material basis of the object is not destroyed, as it is in the case of the "circulation without object" threads. Rather, the material basis changes in a way that has massive environmental consequences: the feathers becoming made out of Matacão changes the material consequences of Mané Pena's trade from one of scarcity and extraction to an attempt to monetize the waste that monetization produces.

This material shift is a violation of the novel's logic as well as the logic of global capitalism. To begin with the novel: to now, the increasing globalization has been marked by a decrease in attention to materiality, a decrease that in itself produces waste on the scale of the Matacão. To use Matacão plastic to solve the problem of scarcity would be to use inattention to material to solve inattention to material. The stakes of this dangerous alchemy are put into sharp focus by Bauman, again in *Wasted Lives*. Glossing Rosa Luxemburg's *The Accumulation of Capital*, in which capitalism "feeds on the ruins" of non-capitalist organizations, he rematerializes the metaphor of devouring. Capitalism is a "snake feeding on its own tail…[and] the distance between the tail and the stomach has become too short for the snake's chances of survival" (70). The material refocusing of Luxemburg's self-devouring capitalism does not end in metaphor, but continues as "asset stripping" to the point of exhaustion of sustenance. This is still basically an extraction or scarcity problem, though, until Bauman turns to waste:

> A hundred years later it seems that a most fatal, possibly *the* most fatal, result of modernity's global triumph is the acute crisis of the human-waste disposal industry: with the volume of human waste outgrowing the extant managerial capacity, there is a plausible prospect of the now planetary modernity choking on its own waste products which it can neither reassimilate nor annihilate. (70)

The full planet is again associated with a waste-disposal crisis, but now the very planetarity of this waste-disposal crisis becomes the cause of global destruction. The image of *choking* shifts the focus from the material exhaustion of a scarcity crisis to the smothering of an abundance crisis. The dual nature of the waste production crisis is an inability to *use* material while being simultaneously unable to destroy or remove it. Commodifying waste should be impossible, because materially it constitutes anti-use---that which cannot be used---and the externalities, rather than the basis, of exchange.

Where the novel exceeds these meditations narratively is in its planetarily optimistic and humanistically pessimistic conclusions about the way environment responds to global capitalism and its crises. To summarize briefly is simple: as a result of ignoring the material substratum, those ignoring it are subject to extraordinary (if cartoonish) violence. Most notable are the instances in which contagion acts as a mechanism for reasserting materiality. The actual feathers carry an infestation leading to a global health crisis, while everything made of Matacão is linked to developing madness among those using the products.

#Conclusion: Human, Commodiscape, Environment

Full entry into the commodiscape, then, 
