---
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
profname: Professor Bruce Robbins
coursename: New Marxist Theory
date: May 10, 2014
title: Coevolution in Contemporary Marxist Theory (or, Gestures toward an Ecological Federalism)
---

Coevolution is an evocative term. It has something of the utopian to it: perhaps the knowledge that human evolution has increasingly come to mean environmental destruction, that so many other evolutionary processes have been driven to extinction, and that the infinite diversity of life on earth has rather seemed to look more and more simply human, and humanity like a monoculture---perhaps all these things give the promise of an alternative in the word “coevolution” a sense of impossible idealism. And yet, far from idealistic, coevolution is a tenet of evolutionary theory, as materialist as it gets. In situations where selective pressure is high and species develop in close proximity, they often grow together and grow more dependent, depending on each other for sustenance or propagation, as in some pairs of insects and flowers (Duffus). Such relationships rely on transformative social relationships among species that become gradually concretized through the reinforcement of advantageous mutations, but unlike in more standard, individual instances of evolutionary development, in coevolution two distinct paths of development occur in tandem and in complex relation, with epochs of cohabitation making the reinforced social structure essential to the survival of all species involved. Coevolution becomes a very tempting idea for adoption into social theory because of this centrality of the social, but such an adoption is far from uncomplicated. The continued usefulness of social Darwinism in perpetuating neoliberal ideologies, for one, should stand as a cautionary tale. Additionally, it is important to avoid conflating the use of a scientific principle as an epistemological framework, or even as a metaphor, with an assertion of actual ontological truth: human action will not lead to actual, biological coevolution, and it is not the contention of this paper that it will. Nor for that matter would true coevolution be desirable, for, as the looming environmental crisis shows, the dependence that comes with it would make human survival even more volatile than it already is. 

The questions underlying this paper will instead be: how can the idea of coevolution open new paths of human development (whether social, political, technological, or of some other kind) that will simultaneously develop the environment and the world ecology? On what scale should these considerations take place, and where would be a productive site of revolutionary praxis---political action on the local, national, or global scale? Quotidian changes in individual practice and means of sustenance? The organic development of new social forms? Finally, what are the limitations to this theory, and what are the necessary political and economic conditions for change along these lines to be viable? Certainly these are large questions, infinitely expandable and beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, some reckoning with them will be necessary for any coherent social theory of coevolution. As a way to pursue these questions in a more focused way and in a context of contemporary Marxism, I will attempt to relate two Marxist theories of coevolution that exist on different scales and terms, but that nevertheless could be of considerable use to each other and the larger conversation: John Bellamy Foster’s and David Harvey’s discussions of coevolution in *Marx’s Ecology* and *The Enigma of Capital*, respectively. Relating them through the questions of scale and units of analysis that are prevalent in Immanuel Wallerstein's world-systems theory, I will argue that reconciling the scales of these two systems of coevolution gives Foster's an opportunity for praxis and Harvey's a much-needed materialism. Finally, I will suggest that the corresponding social strcture necessary for reconciliation is a federalism that takes into account the scale defined by regional ecosystems. 

The system of coevolution described in Harvey's *Enigma* is primarily a system of social coevolution: though many of his points of intervention would lead to material changes, such as the development of new technologies, he begins and ends with different aspects of culture. He defines his system as

>seven distinctive ‘activity spheres’ within the evolutionary trajectory of capitalism: technologies and organisational forms; social relations; institutional and administrative arrangements; production and labour processes; relations to nature; the reproduction of daily life and of the species; and ‘mental conceptions of the world’. … A study of the co-evolution of activity spheres…provides a framework within which to think through the overall evolution and crisis-prone character of capitalist society. (123-4)

This concept of coevolution across the spheres is part of a larger discussion of “capital absorption” crises that result from capital’s need to “generate and internalise its own effective demand if it is to survive under conditions where external possibilities are exhausted.” Those markets are exhausted as a result of the lowered demand that comes from lowered wages and the resultant manufacturing of credit to “bridge the temporal gap” between supply and demand (112). In other words, the opportunistic manipulation of certain activity spheres disrupts and precludes the balanced evolution of the many facets of society, guiding them instead according to profitability and the creation of markets for global capital. Each of these activity spheres as Harvey presents them is semi-autonomous, by no means entirely determined by its fellows but still deeply affected by them. When one sphere is manipulated and its new form taken up by global capitalism, the effects have to be understood to ripple through the rest of the spheres of activity, through relation to nature, social relations, administrative forms, and so forth, in ways that may not be predictable but can potentially be very significant. The payoff of this theory—--beyond its diagnostic and explanatory richness—--comes in the outline of a “co-revolutionary theory” based on his version of coevolution, in which the interrelation of spheres means that a “political movement can start anywhere” within a society, provided that it keeps “moving from one sphere of activity to another in mutually reinforcing ways” (228). But this statement has to be taken as a requirement as well as a possibility; yes, if we build a revolutionary theory from Harvey’s rendering of the “spheres” of activity, the revolution *can* start with (say) the relation of human and nature, but it must quickly have effect in the other fields “in mutually reinforcing ways” if those changes are to persist and make possible any lasting change. Otherwise it will presumably be rejected by a system that is not prepared for it: revolutions do not begin in a void, and the present state of the activity spheres must be taken into account. As Harvey puts it: “Feasible future possibilities arise out of the existing state of relations between the different spheres” (229). The existing realities and histories of societal coevolution must be taken into account before any co-revolutionary theory can take place: thus description and understanding has to precede praxis. 

And yet, despite the use of a concept derived from materialist theories of evolution, Harvey’s concept of coevolution is primarily social, a use of fundamentally ecological concepts as epistemological guides without a corresponding focus on material change or exchanges of energy. This is not a criticism, for Harvey not only does not claim to do otherwise but makes frequent gestures of bracketing the specifics of environmental catastrophe, which allows for the focused development of his theme. Nevertheless, an environmental materialism of the sort provided in John Bellamy Foster’s *Marx’s Ecology* is necessary to avoid a simple replication of the crisis-prone status quo; Foster’s thinking could be a crucial theoretical framework for one of the “activity spheres” to which Harvey most frequently returns, the "relations to nature."

*Marx’s Ecology* is an extended cultivation of the undercurrent of environmentalism in Marx’s work and its relation to his commitment to philosophical materialism of Epicurus and Lucretius. Too often, Foster argues, the Marx*ist* theory of historical materialism in a reductive, weakened form has replaced the robust philosophical materialism of Marx’s thinking, which begins in his doctoral thesis and runs through his later work and that of Friedrich Engels. This and other misunderstandings have led to a misrepresentation of Marx and Marxism as somehow opposed to environmentalism. One of the centerpieces of Foster’s rebuttal to these misrepresentations, his version of a coevolutionary theory, is the unearthing of the Marxian “social metabolism,” a somewhat metaphorical term for the relationship between human and nature that derives from the theories of energetics in nineteenth-century agricultural science (like those of Justus von Liebig and James Anderson). The social metabolism, when it functions as it should, consists of a mutual sustenance of the laborer and the soil: the laborer earns his or her subsistence from small-scale agriculture, which under these conditions leads to a simultaneous re-nourishing of the land by attentive care to the nutrients in the soil. The form this attentive care takes in a functioning social metabolism is never spelled out as clearly as the effects of its disruption, ^[This is perhaps a characteristic lack in Marx’s work, considering for one example his praise of Liebig for having “developed from the point of view of natural science the negative, i.e. destructive side of modern agriculture,” which Foster quotes, and Marx’s larger project of exposing the contradictions of capitalism (qtd. in Foster 155).] but such sustenance presumably entails the natural fertilizer of animal waste that comes from pre-industrial reliance on pack animals. In a passage quoted in Foster’s epilogue, an article by Fred Magdoff, Less Lanyon, and Bill Liebhardt called “Nutrient Cycling, Transformations and Flows” expands on this topic to point out that with the industrialization of agriculture it was no longer “necessary to grow legumes, which naturally fixed nitrogen in the soil, in order to feed ruminant animals. Hence, the dependence on fertilizer nitrogen, the product of the fertilizer industry, increased, with all sorts of negative environmental effects” (qtd. in Foster 253). 

Whatever a functioning social metabolism looks like, it is clear that the cause of its disruption is “[c]apitalist production collect[ing] the population together in great centers...[which] disturbs the metabolic interaction between man and the earth, i.e. it prevents the return to the soil of its constituent elements consumed by man in the form of food and clothing” (Marx, qtd. in Foster 155-6). The large-scale industry that results from such urbanization, in addition to causing the ruination of the labor force, leads to “a squandering of the vitality of the soil, which is carried by trade far beyond the bounds of a single country” (155). Industrial capital is not like the regionally bound systems of labor that preceded it, labor on the scale of the community, in which (according to Marx) labor is “a process by which man, through his own actions, mediates, regulates, and controls the metabolism between himself and nature”; industrialized capital exhausts laborer and soil alike in pursuit of its endless growth (qtd. in Foster 157). Unlike the implements of primordial humanity, which are tools of the labor that constitutes the social metabolism, to industrial capital the humans are the implements, as shown in a passage from elsewhere in *Capital*: “whatever may have been [industrial division of labor’s] starting point, its final form is invariably the same---a productive mechanism whose parts are human beings”; these mechanisms, now made out of humans instead of wielded by them, lead to the ultimate exhaustion of the soil (I: 207). Already in these definitions, the similarities of this theory of coevolution based on the Marxian social metabolism to Harvey’s semi-autonomous spheres of activity begin to present themselves. In order to contextualize and discuss the disrupted metabolism between humanity and nature, one must consider its place in the global system of trade, the effects of industrial organization, and the changing nature of technological implements. That Foster is found to appeal to other spheres of activity to explain relations to nature appears to confirm, or at least be compatible with, Harvey’s version of coevolution; at the same time, his materialist bent allows a more focused examination of the exclusively environmental effects within that system. 

In asking how these two versions of coevolution can work together, it is important to consider the scale of each engagement as well as the type. A quick look at Harvey's *Enigma* shows that he is mainly concerned with the globalization of capital, and thus the development of multiple smaller-scale capitalisms into a single, world capitalism. This transition is necessary to present his view of the 2008 crash as part of a larger, historical capital absorption crisis in which global capital must forever seek greater profitability through new markets, debt speculation, and even urbanization projects. Financialization has occurred in tandem withglobalization in Harvey's view, as the linking of New York and London as financial centers and the international shuffling of national debts illustrate. Put simply, the system that Harvey describes considers flows of wealth and debt on a global scale, and thus it stands to reason that his coevolutionary system would also presume a global scale. Considering Foster's coevolution on a similarly global scale is a more complicated task because of its reliance on ecosystems and material flows of energy, nutrients, and organisms: a functioning social metabolism seems to require a much smaller scale. Several possibilities present themselves as scales on which the social metabolism exists as a coherent system. First, the material exchange of energy and nourishment between a single human and its environment would be defined by the amount of land that human interacts with. Presuming for the sake of simplicity a non-nomadic person, we could imagine that this includes the abode and the amount of land available for agricultural cultivation, hunting, or gathering. Another scale is necessary as soon as we take into account social relations, though, namely the scale of the community. This appears to be the scale that Marx has in mind, at least insofar as he defines the social metabolism as an interaction between "town and country." In this case, imagining (again for the sake of simplicity) a town or city that is isolated and entirely self-sustaining, we would have to include the built environment of the town and its infrastructure, the cultivated area or area of hunting and gathering necessary for the population's sustenance, and the extent of the town's external influence through the production of waste and other factors (such as recreation or the gathering of raw material). A third scale to consider is one that includes the individual human and communities of the same, but is not defined by them---namely, regional ecosystems. To discuss regional ecosystems as though they exist in isolation from human activity is fantastical, but doing so isolates the ecosystem as a process, a circular flow of energies and the interrelation of organisms such that all are maintained. For my purposes, what's important is that hypothetical ecosystems in which humans are included exceed the scale of the community and are defined by the limits of material interrelations, independent of national boundaries except insofar as those boundaries affect material exchanges. It is clear that these smaller systems conflict with the global system of capital described by Harvey's *Enigma*: but this contradiction points not to a disagreement between the theorists but a conflict between the systems they describe. Capitalism that exceeds a single region, which it must eventually do to maintain its sacrosanct three-percent annual growth and ever-increasing profitability, appears to always violate the natural limits established by regional ecosystems.

World-systems theory, particularly that of Immanuel Wallerstein, is particularly useful in discussing conflicts of systemic scale, because in many ways scale is its main concern. The above dilineation of the different scales on which Harvey's and Foster's theories can be maintained is in many ways similar to Wallerstein's insistence on finding the correct "unit of analysis" on which to consider various systems. Harvey's system is primarily wealth- and debt-based while Foster's is based on a materialist ecology of energetics; Wallerstein's systems, in contrast to both, are determined by social relations of production: "We take the defining characteristic of a social system," he says, "to be the existence within it of a division of labor, such that the various sectors or areas are dependent upon economic exchange with others for the smooth and continuous provisioning of the needs of the area" (74). Note that his definition of the social system assumes the interdependence of discrete "sectors" or "areas," and therefore the system is presumably already big enough that no self-sustaining area is possible---only through "economic exchange" of what Marx calls use values are the "needs" of each area met. This assumption of interdependence leads from Wallerstein's disallowance of the "mini-system," which is "an entity that has within it a complete division of labor, and a single cultural framework. Such systems are found only in very simple agricultural or hunting and gathering societies. Such mini-systems no longer exist in the world" (75). Later, the reason for the disappearance of these mini-systems becomes clear: capitalism ceased being agricultural and started being industrial. With this shift the system of the European economy came to "include now the whole of the globe," and as a result "industrial production *required* access to raw materials of a nature and in a quantity such that the needs could not be supplied within the former boundaries"; the means by which these boundaries are transcended was "the absorption of the remaining mini-systems" (94). 

Considering this process allows a re-framing of the distinction between the scale of Harvey's coevolution and the scale of Foster's. Whether or not he would accept Wallerstein's elimination of the mini-system, Harvey's system takes the world as the scale of post-industrial capital, in which each area depends on others for the fulfilling of its needs---the financing of infrastructural projects in small German towns through speculation on U.S. debt is an especially evocative example of how this works in a financialized capitalist system.^[For the German cross-border leasing fiasco, see *Enigma* 142.] But ecosystems are not world-systems. The units of analysis for ecology are materially, rather than epistemologically, determined. The functioning social metabolism requires a mini-system: recall that the rift in the social metabolism occurs, as Marx puts it, as "a squandering of the vitality of the soil, which is carried by trade far beyond the bounds of a single country" (155). This exceeding of boundaries is an identical process to Wallerstein's industrial need of raw materials beyond the boundaries of agricultural capitalism, and Foster illustrates it in a fascinating history of what he calls "guano imperialism," in which industrial agriculture's exhaustion of the soil led to the forcible seizure of islands containing guano that could be used as fertilizer, which in turn led to the total removal of natural fertilizer from its proper ecosystem and its deliverance where it would be more profitable (150-6). Thusthe existence of a larger scale disrupts the smaller ones---the ecologies---on which it depends. ^[Other ecological views of world-systems theory have reached similarly catastrophic conclusions, though with different emphases. Joan Martinez-Alier concludes in part that global flows of energy, resources, and raw materials create a situation in which "the metabolic processes that maintain the centers of the world-system are guaranteed by ecologically unequal exchange, deteriorating terms of trade for natural resources, and sometimes by military power" (233). Martinez-Alier solves the incongruity between the world-scale of capitalism and the eco-scale of the social metabolism by expanding the scope of the latter; nevertheless, the expanded metabolism is one defined by unsustainable and "unequal exchange" (231).] The only functioning ecological metabolism is one that exists on the scale of the regional ecology, and its corresponding social paradigm is the extinct mini-system.

Framing the Marxian metabolism as a mini-system puts a particularly fine point on the problem of attempting to take it up as a theory of social coevolution: the social system required to sustain it is a remnant of a long-gone stage of capitalist development, either belonging to a world which no one now alive has seen or which is known only by those most abused by the world economy. Given that any theory of co-revolution has to take the present state of activity and existing structures as its beginning, a point on which Harvey rightly insists, it is hard to say that moving toward such a state would be anything other than going backwards. A revolutionary policy that returns to a pre-industrial agrarian state, some Jeffersonian wonderland, is entirely unacceptable---both rhetorically (if the utopian ideal sounds miserable, good luck finding adherents) and ethically (how could we support a policy of universalized poverty and return to back-breaking toil, a policy that would realistically lead at best to neo-feudalism?). Given that the only way is forward, it would appear that the ideal would be a new system in which, to return to Wallerstein, the "needs of the area" are derived from that area---in which the division of labor does not surpass the boundaries of the regional ecosystem---but the actual benefits of world exchange are not abandoned.^[It would be likewise unacceptable to restrict interaction between regions. How would medications produced in North America get to Central Africa?]

Following Harvey, if we want to repair this one of his seven spheres, the "relations to nature" that I have equated with the Marxian metabolism, we need to create a system that also takes into account the other spheres of activity. Thus coevolution between human and environment must be part of Harvey's coevolution of the many diverse realms of human life. What is required for such a system is a coexistence of the mini-system with the world system---which is impossible by Wallerstein's system, a fact that I take as a reason to question the inevitability of his system (if not its descriptive accuracy regarding the current state). Discrete systemic units would have to work together in a larger and mutually beneficial world-system, which in aggregate would have a dual nature like light's---both particles and wave depending on the scale on which it is considered. Under capitalism, particularly homogenizing and hegemonic global capitalism, such a system is clearly not possible. Because of the required simultaneity of semi-autonomy and broader cooperation across the semi-autonomous social units, one particular social and legislative structure recommends itself: federalism.

By federalism, I refer to a basic structure like the one described by Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri in their *Declaration*:^[Though I invoke federalism for different reasons, and whether or not I agree with their reasons for supporting it, their description is very helpful] 

>By *federal* here we do not mean a central authority ruling over smaller political units such as states or provinces. Instead we understand *federal* in a more basic sense as an open, extensive relation among diverse political forces spread across the social terrain and not subsumed under an abstract, centralized unity. The shape of the federalist organization as we intend it, in other words, is not pyramidal but horizontal and extensive. Such a federalism fosters the plural and process-oriented dimensions of politics. (89)

Federalism allows the coexistence of smaller units of organization, legislation, and social life without requiring their mutual isolation. It is possible to envision a federalist society in which each sector is self-sustaining, while (when applicable) producing a surplus that is held in common and dealt with in accordance with the common good. An ecological federalism would necessarily determine the size of the federal units according to the natural or cultivated productivity of a region, a process which would presumably be self-regulating via the increase in natural production or the migration of populations away from natural scarcity. The former possibility, the increase of natural productivity, is in accordance with Stephen G. Bunker's argument that the "productivity of labor can only be increased by simultaneously increasing the appropriation and transformation of energy stored in material forms produced in nature, that is, without human intervention or direction" (239). The only way such an increase in natural production could occur is through initial adherence to the scale and specifics of existing ecosystems; expansions of and alterations to these ecosystems would have to happen from within in order to prevent the replication of capitalism's catastrophic transcendence of ecological limits. As Bunker persuasively demonstrates, this shift marks a difference between and incompatibility of "production" and "extraction" as paradigms for interacting with nature through labor. Such expansions of regional ecosystems along with infrastructure, however, would require corresponding social and financial structures on the scale of those regional ecosystems. If we take scale as the determining factor, a federalist system is the nearest social incarnation of the regional ecologies required by the Marxian social metabolism.

This is obviously utopian. I am tempted to echo Harvey here, who says, almost in exasperation, "Of course this is utopian! But so what! We cannot afford not to be" (231). But I am more inclined to take the utopian vision in hand and consider it for its structural elements. (After all, aren't all abstract formulations of government utopian structures, and have we still not built approximations of them out of matter, flesh, and practice?) I am more inclined still to return to my theme and ask how Harvey's system of coevolution and outline of co-revolution can push us toward an ecological federalism, allowing and perhaps beginning with a pursuit of coevolution in the terms described by Foster. 

Harvey says that the co-revolution can start anywhere so long as it resonates through the other spheres, but the larger, still unresolved question of scale has to be answered first. The way to approach this question, somewhat similar to Wallerstein's choice of units of analysis, is to acknowledge that certain scales dictate corresponding types of praxis: a national scale of action necessitates either the use of existing legislative structures or their subversion; a world scale requires the long-hoped-for, spontaneous workers' revolution for which many now seem unwilling to wait. The first step toward a federalist co-revolution would be the local satisfaction of what Wallerstein referred to as the "needs" of an area no longer than its local ecosystem, and the integration of the satisfaction of needs into the processes of that ecosystem. Certainly this is an impulse that has already found limited appeal in the various locavore movements, but it remains a niche, oft-derided, and frequently expensive hobby. Beginning with acknowledgement of the existing capitalism and system of representative government, though, means that we can use its mechanisms to lay the foundation of a better system; this is part of the hidden beauty in Harvey's co-revolution. Taking America as an example, if activism on the local and national levels could lead to subsidization of ecologically-minded and locally bound food practices,^[This presumes a representative system we don't have, one which is actually representative rather than nearly plutocratic. I do not have an answer to this natural objection (if I did, I'd be shouting it), except to say that I doubt very much any change within the existing legislature is possible on any scale unless voices like Elizabeth Warren's in America begin to be heeded within the halls of the existing political structures.] direct economic incentives could be used to encourage local agricultural production while bringing down grocery bills. Such subsidies could in turn lead to the creation of agricultural infrastructure (it would suddenly be profitable), and were oversight by ecologists required for the subsidies to be granted, the material substratum of ecological federalism could be developed without requiring restrictive laws of the type that, in the current cultural climate, would probably be unenforced, unenforcable, and undesirable. Theoretically, this could be the way to allow a reclamation of the mini-system without fanatical isolationism. Such a mini-system, as I have argued, is the necessary scale for Foster's coevolutionary metabolism, and it would also seem to be the scale on which Harvey's system becomes less utopian and more pragmatic. In the anecdotal example with which he begins to think through his coevolutionary spheres, Harvey takes the planned city and the development of a new urbanism as a starting point; the reason for this seems to be that doing so limits the scale to the unit of a single community, a unit on the scale of which such changes and organic social developments are thinkable.

There is a reason why so much utopian fiction begins with the creation of a closed-circuit.^[See the first few chapters of Frederic Jameson's *Archeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions*.] Thomas More's foundational novel, *Utopia*, is a particularly good example, not least because it set the tone for the genre that followed it. More's Utopia is an island that provides everything for itself and holds everything in common, but he doesn't pretend there is not a kind of world system that can threaten it. Its surplus is ejected and "sold" to countries more involved in that world system, the monetary proceeds for which they have no use is stored in foreign banks, and using the financial machinery of the day Utopia becomes a quiet hegemon, using the threat of recalling its loans to maintain loyalty and insulate itself from attack or the need for participation in the external affairs so unnecessary to it. It stands to reason that more than one such society can be imagined to coexist, and that external relations need not be so isolationist and Machiavellian as they are in More's vision. Most important for the purposes of this paper, such a loose association of self-sustaining units on a scale up to or commensurate with ecological exchanges of material and energy allows a revolution to begin with ecological sustainability and let the rest of the seven spheres follow. In this way, Foster's coevolutionary system can exist inside of and provide a starting point for Harvey's.