---
title: Labor and Environment in Henry Neville's *The Isle of Pines*
author: Phillip R. Polerone
coursename: Early Caribbean Literature
profname: Professor Silva
date: December 8, 2014
---

[Locke 1689, Neville 1668. maybe begin with a reading of locke, and something like "though neville precedes locke by the same etc, they can be said to be responding to the same set of circumstances: encountering entirely new lands for which new views of property, development, and government needed to be developed. What Locke achieves through philosophical treatise, Neville achieves through utopian narrative.^[footnote about the difference between utopian narrative and utopia meaning something good for everyone involved]"] The tension between an Edenic environment that provides without the intervention of labor and the cultivated environment consistent with colonizing ultimately stages a conflict between the colonial expectation of leisure on one hand and the requirements of both property and morality on the other. Ultimately, the work concludes with a call to possession through cultivation while still maintaining the promise of leisurely abundance; this contradiction of land cultivation and leisurely lifestyle can only be resolved by the slave economy that such colonies would eventually take up. The text of Henry Neville's *The Isle of Pines* is therefore a unique case study in the promises made to would-be settlers that can only be resolved by slavery.

This promise begins with a depiction of environmental abundance. Like Locke's commons, which "is given to men for the support and comfort of their being" and is "produced by the spontaneous hand of nature," the Isle of Pines is rendered from the beginning as an environment that produces without the guiding hand of labor. This is most clearly rendered in the accounts of the first encounters with the island, originally by Pines himself and later by the narrator Henry Cornelius Van Sloetten and his crew, as the observers marvel at the environments peculiarity. Pines's account mentions "a ſort of Nuts, as big as a large Apple, whoſe kernel being pleasant and dry…we made uſe of inſtead of bread," using the size of the natural produce to create an image of plenty (19). The size of the nut and the quality of its kernel, all of which are encountered rather than produced, are carefully set against "bread," the corresponding staple of the civilized world. Replacing bread with something found does away with the necessity of planting, milling, and baking---everything is already prepared by nature. A similar image of abundance appears in the island's fauna, or in culinary terms, in meat: Pines also encounters a landscape "full" with specimens of "a beaſt about the ſize of a Goat…which brought two young ones at a time, and that twice a year" (19). Where the agricultural foodstuffs are representationally made plentiful by size augmentation and by making them seem already prepared, the island's supply of meat is made quadrupally procreative. Fertility of land is mirrored in fertility of animals, a feature that will be mirrored in human fertility (as shall be seen later). Besides fertility, the animals in question are essentially born domesticated---the gentleness of the land and its Edenic quality of peacefulness breeds correspondingly gentle animals. Pines finds an island of "harmleſs creature[s] and tame, ſo that we could eaſily take and kill them" which they "had great ſtore of, ſo that in effect as to Food we wanted nothing" (19). The landscape depicted here is one that appears to do the work itself, insofar as any sustenance that does not have to be produced is already being "produced" naturally. At first glance, this island is one that provides all the conveniences of a modern world without requiring labor in any form.

Van Sloetten's account of the environment, but the emphasis is different in one key respect that can be taken as the difference between the explorer's perspective and the settlers; thus in his version, it is possible to see a more direct address to those who would be most likely taking the first steps of colonizing the island. He agrees with Pines that the "ſeveral ſorts of Beaſts we ſaw, who were not ſo much wild as in other Countries," requiring neither hunt nor pen to be made useful (24). In addition, though, Van Sloetten provides a very useful metaphor for the type of environment they are both describing, but one that relies more heavily on passage than settling: 

> It was very ſtrange to us, to ſee that in ſuch a fertile Countrey which was as yet never inhabited, there ſhould be notwithstanding ſuch a free and clear paſſage to us, without the hinderance of Buſhes, Thorns, and ſuch like ſtuff, wherewith moſt Iſlands of the like nature are peſtered: the length of the Graſs (which yet was very much intermixt with flowers) being the only impediment that we found. (25)

The passage directly addresses a contradiction of the paradigm that Pines's account has set up: the country that is too fertile should be wild, and wilderness *per se* is not the kind of habitable environment of which colonial dreams are made. This tension is established through the postulation of two conflicting wishes. First, the "fertile Countrey which was as yet never inhabited": the land that promises production but remains "virgin," meaning both that it is sure to be profitable and unencumbered by a preexisting Lockean enclosure---and through enclosure, conflicting claims of ownership. In short, the untapped vein that nobody else has found yet. The second, conflicting wish is to retain the comforts of life in the settled world, comforts that are based on enclosure and careful management. This wish, too, is granted, as what would prevent it is carefully set aside by a surprised Van Sloetten. Note that the language with which the discomforts of nature are dismissed is the language of annoyance: travelers to the Isle of Pines are free of the "hinderance" of wilderness by which explorers are normally "peſtered." These conflicting desires are both satisfied metaphorically in the image of the lack of physical "impediment." Not only are the limitations absent, but what replaces them closely resembles the lawns of an estate: slightly overlong "Graſs" tastefully "intermixt with flowers." Van Sloetten, addressing the would-be explorers more directly through his similarity to them, adds to Pines's promise of a return to Eden the more earthly promise of comfort, easy money, and a free lunch. In short, leisure.

Not only is this environment one that permits life without work or alteration of environment, it is also one that, for its inhabitants, has prevented any significant labor or development, implicitly calling into question the effect of such a luxurious environment on the development of new civilizations; this tension is rendered as a conflict between nature and technology. Unsurprisingly, given the emphasis on ease of passage and uncultivated plenty, the island inhabitants have not been called to work, but what is more surprising is that the most basic technologies of labor have not survived the several generations since the first landing. So basic are there dwellings as a result that are "made under Trees, and faſhioned up with boughs, graſs, and ſuch like ſtuffe to defend them from the Sun and Rain" (24). Even construction is premised on gathering, with any alteration going only so far as it is possible to without dismantling the existing environment. Furthermore, the islanders have no paradigm for understanding the Van Sloetten's technologies but a naturalizing one. Van Sloetten describes the islanders as "ſo wondering at our ſhip, as if it had been the greateſt miracle of Nature in whole World" (15). Several generations in, the inhabitants of the Isle of Pines have entirely overwritten technology with the productivity of nature. Natural fecundity blots out the ability to change the environment by making the concept unnecessary. Thus, when they encounter tool-assisted labor, it exceeds anything they have seen before or are able to describe: 

> we got all our cutting Inſtruments on Land, and fell to hewing down of trees, with which, in a little time, (many hands making light work) we built up a Pallace for this William Pines the Lord of that Countrey; which, though much inferiour to the houſes of your Gentry in England. Yet to them which never had ſeen better, it appeared a very Lordly Place. This deed of ours was beyond expreſſion acceptable unto him, loading us with thanks for ſo great a benefit, of which he ſaid he ſhould never be able to make a requital. (26)

Neville takes care to emphasize how easy this job is to Van Sloetten's men, and how rudimentary it would seem to modern tastes. The "light" work is done "in a little time," in no small part due to the basic organization of work represented metonymically  by "many hands." The simplicity of labor leads to simplicity of product, an "inferiour" house in the eyes of "your Gentry in England," but they "never had ſeen better," implying that no superior or more sophisticated work has been done on the island in the lifetimes of any present. This lack of any sophisticated labor is a condition of the unaltered nature characteristic of the Lockean commons, as is demonstrated by the demonstrably invasive labor of Van Sloetten's team---they engage in the "hewing down of trees" with "cutting Inſtruments," a marked instance of what Locke calls "appropriation" rather than use of what is provided by nature. This palace is made *out* of trees, as opposed to the dwellings made by the inhabitants of the island, which are "made under Trees" (24). The use of technology makes the difference between leisure and labor, gathering and cultivating, and the commons and private property. 

The contrast of technological alteration of environment and natural availability of environmentally produced foodstuff is overtly replicated in the island's sexual economy, and through this complicated mirroring Neville moralizes the nature-cultivation debate. The first encounter with a woman of the Isle of Pines associates modesty with technological development and the heritage of Western civilization that have been all but lost by Isle's residents. This association is made through the use of woven cloth: "Her privities were hid with ſome pieces of old Garments, the Relicts of those Cloathes (I ſuppose) of them which firſt came hither, and yet being adorned with Flowers thoſe very rags seemeth beautiful" (16). That the cloth is woven is not enough to make the link between modesty and technological production, but it is clearly situated as a material inheritance of the first settlers of the island. The deliberate, aesthetic decoration of the clothes with flowers, too, is a modernizing touch that seems to bring the clothing into a value system more characteristic of the modern world. The technology does not just exist in its material product, though: it is also passed on as a structure of knowledge. From the relics of technologically produced goods, subsequent generations of the Isle of Pines have learned to produce their own clothes, and with that process of production, the value system itself: 

> and indeed modeſty ſo far prevaileth over all the Female Sex of that Iſland, that with graſs and flowers interwoven and made ſtrong by the peelings of young Elms (which grow there in great plenty) they do plat together ſo many of them as ſerve to cover thoſe parts which nature would have hidden. (16-7)

Most notable here is the alteration of naturally-gathered materials through what is elsewhere referred to as "art," seen in the description of these materials as "interwoven." Grammatically, the production process itself is caused by the prevalence of modesty on the island: it takes to such an extent "that" they undertake to weave these rudimentary clothes. More broadly, this is the only example of a technology that has been passed down *as a practice* from one generation to another, with the exception of limited reading and writing.^["I having taught ſome of my children to read formerly, for I had left ſtill the Bible, I charged it ſhould be read once a moneth at a general meeting" (21).] There is an obvious problem, though, with associating modesty (morality) with technology and, therefore, civilization. The reason this single technology is passed down is precisely because it corresponds with the dictates of nature: they only "cover thoſe parts which nature would have hidden." Despite the use of technology, the women of the Island of Pines remain within a natural paradigm in Neville's view through modesty's naturalization. Between these technologies and reading, it is clear that the only "natural" technologies are those that contribute to the existence of morality; at the same time, this statement subtly establishes technological labor as a moralizing tool.

The narrative climax and final words of the work both expose a contradiction in the colonial view of environment, predicated on the nature-cultivation tension maintained throughout, that is only resolvable by the use of slave labor. In this view, *The Isle of Pines* becomes a demonstration of the way that the ideals of New World settlements---the impossible dual wish of Van Stoeller's description of environment---are predicated on slave labor while eliding it at the same time. Narratively, the use of European weapon technology resolves a racially delineated act of moral transgression. One of the "Phils," the one of the four tribes on the island descended from "the *Negro*-woman," violate the Island's laws against sexual violence, and are defeated by the guns of Van Sloetten's crew (27). Use of technology to enforce Old-World legal structures is simultaneously, in this instance, a way of defending settlers of primarily European descent from those of partially African descent. This act is explained with the rhetorical question, "for waht could nakedneſs do to encounter with Arms," bringing together the technologies of morality with the technologies of racial subjugation. The necessity of slavery to the colonial ideal is also established by a lacuna in the final juxtaposition of natural abundance and cultivation. After detailing the delight from the residents of the Isle of Pines upon encountering a bagpipe---significantly, they are unwilling to believe it is "not a living creature," again demonstrating the limitations placed on understanding technology by Neville's psychology of plenty---Van Sloetten juxtaposes noble simplicity with a call for large-scale cultivation:

> we may account them fortunate, in that poſſeſſing little, they enjoy all things, as being contented with what they have, wanting thoſe alurements to miſchief, which our European Countries are enriched with. …[I]t is a place enriched with Natures abundance, deficient in nothing conducible to the ſuſtentation of mans life, which were it Manured by Agri‑culture and Gardening, as other of our European Countries are, no queſtion but it would equal, if not exceed many which now paſs for praiſe worthy. (30)

The slightness of their possessions is made morally superior by the association of European possessions with "miſchief," and the islanders' freedom from it with the "enjoy[ment] of all things." At first glance, preservation of this lifestyle seems to be the preservation of a lifestyle made moral by the combination of leisure and distance from Europe---the aristocratic lifestyle projected onto a world far from the circulation of material goods. And yet, this moral glorification of the islanders' lifestyle is presented without contradiction next to the call for the simultaneous extension of "Natures abundance" by "Agri-culture and Gardening, as other of our European Countries are." In other words, Neville glorifies the leisure of the plentiful island lifestyle while calling for the anything-but-leisurely task of Agri-cultural reform. In this dual statement, it is possible to see the logic of the earlier contradiction between the natural environment that appears like an estate of the English gentry, and the entire logic of the rest of the naturally-providing environment: labor is required to make it so, but that labor is made invisible through the vision of an environment. Furthermore, the brief scene of the Phils' subjugation shows how that labor is going to be attained. Environmental depiction in *The Isle of Pines* is used as a way of justifying empire while hiding what it takes to get it.