---
title: Labor and Environment in Henry Neville's *The Isle of Pines*
author: Phillip R. Polerone (Graduate Student)
coursename: Early Caribbean Literature
profname: Professor Cristobal Silva
date: December 8, 2014
---

> "The earth, and all that is therein, is given to men for the support and comfort of their being. And tho' all the fruits it naturally produces, and beasts it feeds, belong to mankind in common, as they are produced by the spontaneous hand of nature; and no body has originally a private dominion, exclusive of the rest of mankind, in any of them, as they are thus in their natural state: yet being given for the use of men, there must of necessity be a means to appropriate them some way or other, before they can be of any use, or at all beneficial to any particular man. The fruit, or venison, which nourishes the wild Indian, who knows no enclosure, and is still a tenant in common, must be his, and so his, i.e. a part of him, that another can no longer have any right to it, before it can do him any good for the support of his life." --John Locke, *Second Treatise of Civil Government*

In John Locke's version of the commons, whatever is produced naturally is the dominion of all humankind. It is only in "appropriat[ing]" the fruits of nature that they become useful to the individual in need of sustenance. There is also a distinction made between what "belong[s] to mankind in common" and private property, though, with the difference between the European and the "wild Indian" being the knowledge of "enclosure," of an environment altered to suit the needs of the one who alters it. Work is the genesis of property that is private from the start, and without the recognizable marks of work, everything is waiting to be appropriated by someone who will make it "a part of him."" Such concepts as these are historically contingent in a very clear sense, a sense to which the figure of the "wild Indian" is a clue: there is no need of such a framework in a world in which everything is already owned. It could only be written when it was, in 1689, when vast swaths of land needed to be made unclaimed in order to be claimed by someone else. It should not be surprising, then, to find similarities in a work written some twenty years prior (1668), Henry Neville's *The Isle of Pines*. In addition to dealing with similar (but far less clear) distinctions between the status of land that has been subject to labor and land that has not, Neville's text also provides a way of seeing how conflicting colonial views of the New World environment is premised on the introduction of slave labor. The tension between an Edenic environment, which provides without the intervention of labor, and the cultivated environment, which is altered to suit the colonial project, ultimately stages a conflict between the colonial expectation of leisure on one hand and the requirements of both property and morality on the other. Ultimately, *The Isle of Pines* concludes with a call to possess the islands by cultivating them, even though it also maintains the promise of leisurely abundance. This contradiction between land cultivation and a leisurely lifestyle can only be resolved by the slave economy that such colonies would eventually take up. The text of Henry Neville's *The Isle of Pines* can therefore be read case study in the utopian promises made to would-be settlers that can only be fulfilled in practice by a slave economy.

These promises begin with a depiction of environmental abundance. Like Locke's commons, which "is given to men for the support and comfort of their being" and is "produced by the spontaneous hand of nature," the Isle of Pines is represented from the beginning as an environment that produces without the guidance of labor. This is most clearly rendered in the first encounters with the island, first^[First chronologically, not narratively.] by Pines himself and later by the narrator Henry Cornelius Van Sloetten and his crew. Pines's account mentions "a ſort of Nuts, as big as a large Apple, whoſe kernel being pleasant and dry…we made uſe of inſtead of bread," using the size of the natural produce to create an image of plenty (19). The size of the nut and the quality of its kernel, all of which are encountered rather than produced, are carefully set against "bread," the corresponding staple of the civilized world. Replacing bread with something found does away with quite a lot of labor---the necessity of planting, milling, and baking---leaving everything instead already prepared by nature. A similar image of abundance appears in the island's fauna, or in culinary terms, in meat: Pines also encounters a landscape "full" with specimens of "a beaſt about the ſize of a Goat…which brought two young ones at a time, and that twice a year" (19). Where the agricultural foodstuffs represent abundance through size augmentation and by already being prepared, the island's supply of meat for its part is made quadruply procreative. Fertility of land is mirrored in fertility of animals, a feature that will be mirrored in human fertility (as shall be seen later). Besides fertility, the animals in question are essentially born domesticated---the gentleness of the land and its Edenic quality of peacefulness breeds correspondingly gentle animals. Pines finds an island of "harmleſs creature[s] and tame, ſo that we could eaſily take and kill them," animals which they "had great ſtore of, ſo that in effect as to Food we wanted nothing" (19). The landscape depicted here is one that appears to do the work on itself, insofar as any sustenance that does not have to be produced is already being "produced" naturally. At first glance, this island is one that provides all the conveniences of a modern world without requiring labor in any form.

Van Sloetten's account of the environment is quite similar, but the emphasis is different in one key respect that can be taken as the difference between the explorer's perspective and the settlers; in his version, it is possible to see a more direct address to those who would be most likely taking the first steps of colonizing the island. He agrees with Pines that the "ſeveral ſorts of Beaſts we ſaw…were not ſo much wild as in other Countries," requiring neither hunt nor pen to be made useful (24). In addition to this image of plentiful food, though, Van Sloetten provides a very useful metaphor for the type of environment they are both describing, one that relies more heavily on travel than settling in place: 

> It was very ſtrange to us, to ſee that in ſuch a fertile Countrey which was as yet never inhabited, there ſhould be notwithstanding ſuch a free and clear paſſage to us, without the hinderance of Buſhes, Thorns, and ſuch like ſtuff, wherewith moſt Iſlands of the like nature are peſtered: the length of the Graſs (which yet was very much intermixt with flowers) being the only impediment that we found. (25)

The passage directly addresses a contradiction of the paradigm that Pines's account has set up: the country that is too fertile should be wild, but wilderness *per se* is not the kind of habitable environment of which colonial dreams are made. This tension is established through the postulation of two conflicting wishes. First, the "fertile Countrey which was as yet never inhabited": the land that promises production but remains "virgin," meaning both that it is sure to be profitable and unencumbered by a preexisting Lockean enclosure---and through enclosure, conflicting claims of ownership. In short, the first wish is for the untapped vein that nobody else has found yet. The second, conflicting wish is to retain the comforts of life in the settled world, comforts that are based on enclosure and careful management. This wish, too, is granted, as what would prevent it is carefully set aside by Van Sloetten's narration. Note that the language with which the discomforts of nature are dismissed is the language of annoyance: travelers to the Isle of Pines are free of the "hinderance" of wilderness by which explorers are normally "peſtered." These conflicting desires are both satisfied metaphorically in the image of the lack of physical "impediment." Not only are the limitations absent, but what replaces them closely resembles the lawns of an estate: slightly overlong "Graſs" tastefully "intermixt with flowers." Van Sloetten, more likely addressing the would-be explorers due to his similarity to them, adds to Pines's promise of a return to Eden the more earthly promise of comfort, easy money, and leisure.

Not only is this environment one that permits life without work or alteration of environment, it is also one that, for its inhabitants, has *prevented* any such significant labor or development, implicitly calling into question the effect of such a luxurious environment on the development of new civilizations; this tension is depicted throughout as a conflict between nature and technology. Unsurprisingly, given the emphasis on ease of passage and uncultivated plenty, the island inhabitants have not been called to work, but what is more surprising is that the most basic technologies of labor have not survived the several generations since the first landing. So basic are their dwellings as a result as to be "made under Trees, and faſhioned up with boughs, graſs, and ſuch like ſtuffe to defend them from the Sun and Rain" (24). Even construction is premised on gathering rather than labor, with any alteration going only so far as it is possible to without dismantling the existing environment. Furthermore, the islanders have no means of understanding European technologies but to naturalize them. Van Sloetten describes the islanders as "ſo wondering at our ſhip, as if it had been the greateſt miracle of Nature in whole World" (15). Several generations in, the inhabitants of the Isle of Pines have entirely overwritten technology with the productivity of nature, to the point of being unable to comprehend a piece of technology without which their ancestors would not have arrived. In other words, natural fecundity blots out the ability to change the environment by making the concept unnecessary. Thus, when they encounter tool-assisted labor, it exceeds anything they have seen before or are able to describe: 

> we got all our cutting Inſtruments on Land, and fell to hewing down of trees, with which, in a little time, (many hands making light work) we built up a Pallace for this William Pines the Lord of that Countrey; which, though much inferiour to the houſes of your Gentry in England. Yet to them which never had ſeen better, it appeared a very Lordly Place. This deed of ours was beyond expreſſion acceptable unto him, loading us with thanks for ſo great a benefit, of which he ſaid he ſhould never be able to make a requital. (26)

Neville takes care to emphasize how easy this job is for Van Sloetten's men, and how rudimentary its product would seem to modern tastes. The "light" work is done "in a little time," in no small part due to the basic organization of work represented metonymically  by "many hands." The simplicity of labor leads to simplicity of product, an "inferiour" house in the eyes of "your Gentry in England," but they "never had ſeen better," implying that no superior or more sophisticated work has been done on the island in the lifetimes of any present. This lack of any sophisticated labor is a condition of the unaltered nature characteristic of the Lockean commons, as is clear from the demonstrably invasive labor of Van Sloetten's team---they engage in the "hewing down of trees" with "cutting Inſtruments," a marked instance of what Locke calls "appropriation" rather than use of what is provided by nature. This palace is made *out* of trees, as opposed to the dwellings made by the inhabitants of the island, which are "made under Trees" (24). The use of technology marks the difference between leisure and labor, gathering and cultivating, and the commons and private property. 

The contrast of technological alteration of environment and natural availability of environmentally produced foodstuff is overtly replicated in the island's sexual economy, and through this complicated mirroring Neville moralizes the nature-cultivation conflict. The first encounter with a woman of the Isle of Pines associates modesty with technological development, doing so through the vestiges of Western civilization that have been all but lost by Isle's residents. This association is made through the use of woven cloth: "Her privities were hid with ſome pieces of old Garments, the Relicts of those Cloathes (I ſuppose) of them which firſt came hither, and yet being adorned with Flowers thoſe very rags seemeth beautiful" (16). That the cloth is woven is not enough to make the link between modesty and technological production, but it is clearly situated as a material inheritance from the first settlers of the island. The technology does not just exist in its material product, though: it is also passed on as a structure of knowledge. From the relics of technologically produced goods, subsequent generations of the Isle of Pines have learned to produce their own clothes, and with that process of production, they reproduce  value system itself: 

> and indeed modeſty ſo far prevaileth over all the Female Sex of that Iſland, that with graſs and flowers interwoven and made ſtrong by the peelings of young Elms (which grow there in great plenty) they do plat together ſo many of them as ſerve to cover thoſe parts which nature would have hidden. (16-7)

Most notable here is the alteration of naturally-gathered materials through what is elsewhere referred to as "art," seen in the description of these materials as "interwoven." Grammatically, the production process itself is caused by the prevalence of modesty on the island: it takes to such an extent "that" they undertake to weave these rudimentary clothes. More broadly, this is the only example of a technology that has been passed down *as a practice* from one generation to another, with the exception of limited reading and writing.^["I having taught ſome of my children to read formerly, for I had left ſtill the Bible, I charged it ſhould be read once a moneth at a general meeting" (21).] There is an obvious problem, though, with associating modesty (morality) with technology and, therefore, civilization. The reason this single technology is passed down is precisely because it corresponds with the dictates of nature: they only "cover thoſe parts which nature would have hidden." Despite the use of technology, the women of the Island of Pines remain within a natural paradigm in Neville's view through modesty's naturalization. Between these technologies and reading, it is clear that the only "natural" technologies are those that contribute to the existence of morality; at the same time, this statement subtly establishes technological labor as a moralizing tool.

The narrative climax and final words of the work both expose a contradiction in the colonial view of environment, predicated on the nature-cultivation tension maintained throughout, that is only resolvable by the use of slave labor. In this view, *The Isle of Pines* becomes a demonstration of the way that the ideals of New World settlements---the impossible dual wish of Van Stoeller's description of environment---are predicated on slave labor while eliding it at the same time. Narratively, the use of European weapon technology resolves a racially delineated act of moral transgression. One of the "Phils," the one of the four tribes on the island descended from "the *Negro*-woman," violate the Island's laws against sexual violence, and are defeated by the guns of Van Sloetten's crew (27). Use of technology to enforce Old-World legal structures is simultaneously, in this instance, a way of defending settlers of primarily European descent from those of partially African descent. This act is explained with the rhetorical question, "for what could nakedneſs do to encounter with Arms," bringing together the technologies of morality with the technologies of racial subjugation. The necessity of slavery to the colonial ideal is also established by a lacuna in the final juxtaposition of natural abundance and cultivation. After detailing the delight from the residents of the Isle of Pines upon encountering a bagpipe---significantly, they are unwilling to believe it is "not a living creature," again demonstrating the limitations placed on understanding technology by Neville's psychology of plenty---Van Sloetten puts noble simplicity in contact with a call for large-scale cultivation:

> we may account them fortunate, in that poſſeſſing little, they enjoy all things, as being contented with what they have, wanting thoſe alurements to miſchief, which our European Countries are enriched with. …[I]t is a place enriched with Natures abundance, deficient in nothing conducible to the ſuſtentation of mans life, which were it Manured by Agri‑culture and Gardening, as other of our European Countries are, no queſtion but it would equal, if not exceed many which now paſs for praiſe worthy. (30)

The slightness of their possessions is made morally superior by the association of European possessions with "miſchief," and the islanders' freedom from it with the "enjoy[ment] of all things." At first glance, preservation of this lifestyle seems to be the preservation of a lifestyle made moral by the combination of leisure and distance from Europe---the aristocratic lifestyle projected onto a world far from the circulation of material goods. And yet, this moral glorification of the islanders' lifestyle is presented without contradiction next to the call for the simultaneous extension of "Natures abundance" by "Agri-culture and Gardening, as other of our European Countries are." In other words, Neville glorifies the leisure of the plentiful island lifestyle while calling for the anything-but-leisurely task of Agri-cultural reform. In this dual statement, it is possible to see the logic of the earlier contradiction between the natural environment that appears like an estate of the English gentry, and the entire logic of the rest of the naturally-providing environment: labor is required to make it so, but that labor is made invisible through the vision of an environment. Furthermore, the brief scene of the Phils' subjugation shows how that labor is going to be attained. Environmental depiction in *The Isle of Pines* is used as a way of justifying empire while hiding what it takes to get it.

Setting Henry Neville's narrative next to John Locke's exposition makes a contrast between the definition of types of property and the choice of how property should be understood. Locke's version is arguably more clear-cut from the perspective of someone navigating it---it relies only on what has been done to alter a piece of land, on action that has or has not happened (however complicated the ramifications of that criterion). Neville's approach to property is all the more complicated because it deals with desires, and the conflicting desires that conflict with the dictates of material and political reality. In the sense shown above, Neville's conflicting wishes were both resolvable, but only through the application of one of the most heinous and contradictory economic systems in recorded history.