rth , but ten years later , when the boy was already beginning to turn a very sensible , vigorous eye on the world , Mr. Henry Worthington Cowperwood , because of the death of the bank 's president a
ood , decisively. The auctioneer , a short lean faced , spare man with bushy hair and an incisive eye , looked at him curiously and almost incredulously but without pausing. He had , somehow , in spi
t without pausing. He had , somehow , in spite of himself , been impressed by the boy 's peculiar eye ; and now he felt , without knowing why , that the offer was probably legitimate enough , and tha
 , or a little earlier , that he began to take an interest in girls. He had from the first a keen eye for the beautiful among them ; and , being good-looking and magnetic himself , it was not difficu
 had picked up what you wanted. All had their little note-books. All had their peculiar squint of eye or position or motion which meant `` Done ! I take you ! '' Sometimes they seemed scarcely to con
 many sudden and almost unheard-of changes. He began to look at her at times , with a speculative eye -- not very critically , for he liked her -- but with an attempt to weigh her personality. He had
 , and , besides , I 'm not as young as I used to be. '' He allowed a semi-twinkle to rest in his eye as he looked his visitor over. Cowperwood smiled. '' Well , I hope I can be of service to you , '
rer , for some odd reason , felt that Mr. Cowperwood was a man who could make him some money. His eye was so keen ; his expression was so alert , and yet so subtle. He told the governor and some othe
ough old , could be given a new brownstone front and made very significant. He saw in his mind 's eye a handsome building , fitted with an immense plate-glass window ; inside his hardwood fixtures vi
 had a stodgy , dusty , commonplace look to him which was more a matter of mind than of body. His eye was of vague gray-blue ; his hair a dusty light-brown and thin. His mouth -- there was nothing im
re used , some oval , some oblong , some square , and some circular , following a given theory of eye movement. The fixtures for the gas-jets were modeled after the early Roman flame-brackets , and t
are-toed , soft-leather shoes ; his stocky chest and fat legs were made somewhat agreeable to the eye by a well-cut suit of brownish-gray cloth ; and his neck was now surrounded by a low , wing-point
he excitement was at its highest Cowperwood came in. As he stood in the door looking to catch the eye of Rivers , the 'change gong sounded , and trading stopped. All the brokers and traders faced abo
hink over what I have to tell you. '' He was in front of Stener now , looking him directly in the eye and by the kinetic force of his mental way attempting to make Stener take the one step that might
ked as though there was little to be done with him. His face was a grayish-blue : his eyelids and eye rings puffy and his hands and lips moist. God , what a hole he was in now ! '' Say that 's all ri
as helpless as we might be , all things considered. '' There was a slight gleam of triumph in his eye as he said this , at the same time that there was a slight shadow of disappointment in Mollenhaue
where he 'll go if I have my say. '' Both Mollenhauer and Simpson turned a reserved and inquiring eye on their usually genial associate. What could be the reason for his sudden determination to have
, and more than his interest. '' '' Quite so , '' replied Mollenhauer , looking Cowperwood in the eye steadily and estimating the force and accuracy of the man at their real value. `` I understand ex
, '' he observed once to Borchardt , quietly , and the latter replied , with a smile and a kindly eye , that as far as he was concerned , it was a form of procedure which was absolutely unavoidable a
 days of his prosperity. He wore a new gray suit and a brown tie , and was clean-shaven. When his eye caught Cowperwood 's steady beam , it faltered and drooped. He rubbed his ear foolishly. Cowperwo
ch a fool. Still I did all I could. '' Cowperwood also watched Mrs. Stener out of the tail of his eye -- an undersized , peaked , and sallow little woman , whose clothes fitted her abominably. It was
orld. It would seem as though the physical substance of life -- this apparition of form which the eye detects and calls real were shot through with some vast subtlety that loves order , that is order
rticular danger of escape , for a guard stood always at his private door instructed `` to keep an eye '' on the general movements of all the inmates. A prisoner so accommodated was in many respects q
 entered the sitting-room , and there sat his wife by the oblong center-table , sewing a hook and eye on one of Lillian , second 's , petticoats. She looked up , at his step , with the peculiarly unc
r me in the course of tieyesme. '' He talked slowly and emphatically , looking Desmas directly in the eye all of the time. Desmas was very much impressed. '' That 's all right , '' he said , now that he
-stairs. Some of the cells have a yard there ; if there are any empty -- '' The warden cocked his eye wisely , and Cowperwood saw that his tot was not to be as bad as he had anticipated -- though bad
ody like that , except on visiting days -- '' And here he paused and rolled a large and informing eye on Cowperwood -- such an eye as was supposed to convey dark and mysterious things. `` But all the
iting days -- '' And here he paused and rolled a large and informing eye on Cowperwood -- such an eye as was supposed to convey dark and mysterious things. `` But all the rules ain't kept around here
ide ourselves on our ability to make over one brilliant scene into another in the twinkling of an eye , and flash before the gaze of an onlooker picture after picture , which appear and disappear as
and a chin that tended to be pointed. His eyebrows were bushy , emphasizing vague , grayish-green eyes , and his hair was short and smooth and nicely parted. He wore a frock-coat always -- it was quit
perwood was of a religious temperament -- a small woman , with light-brown hair and clear , brown eyes , who had been very attractive in her day , but had become rather prim and matter-of-fact and inc
a clean , stalky , shapely boy , with a bright , clean-cut , incisive face ; large , clear , gray eyes ; a wide forehead ; short , bristly , dark-brown hair. He had an incisive , quick-motioned , self
 sand , apparently seeing nothing -- you could not tell in which way his beady , black buttons of eyes were looking -- but apparently they were never off the body of the squid. The latter , pale and w
fat or jade , moved about in torpedo fashion ; but his movements were apparently never out of the eyes of his enemy , for by degrees small portions of his body began to disappear , snapped off by the
told his wife about it , and so his son , in this roundabout way , heard it , and his clear , big eyes glistened. He wondered why his father did not take advantage of the situation and buy some Texas
, with a big , round body , a round , smooth head rather bald , a clear , ruddy complexion , blue eyes , and what little hair he had of a sandy hue. He was exceedingly well dressed according to standa
y now. There was real force in that sturdy young body -- no doubt of it. Those large , clear gray eyes were full of intelligence. They indicated much and revealed nothing. '' A smart boy ! '' he said
et , was the first to attract his attention or be attracted by him. Black hair and snapping black eyes were her portion , with pretty pigtails down her back , and dainty feet and ankles to match a dai
runette , and Marjorie Stafford was as fair as the morning , with bright-red cheeks , bluish-gray eyes , and flaxen hair , and as plump as a partridge. It was at seventeen that he decided to leave sch
ark , where three-hundred-pound bags were weighed into the government bonded warehouses under the eyes of United States inspectors. In certain emergencies he was called to assist his father , and was
carried out. He was , to look at , a phlegmatic type of man -- short , stout , wrinkled about the eyes , rather protuberant as to stomach , red-necked , red-faced , the least bit popeyed , but shrewd
'' Yes , '' said George , a much leaner and slightly taller man , with dark , blurry , reflective eyes and a thin , largely vanished growth of brownish-black hair which contrasted strangely with the e
th crisp , dark-brown hair and fixed on a pair of square shoulders and a stocky body. Already his eyes had the look that subtle years of thought bring. They were inscrutable. You could tell nothing by
business. The latter , a big man with curly gray hair , a gnarled and yet pudgy face , and little eyes that peeked out shrewdly through fat eyelids , looked at Cowperwood curiously when he came in. ''
ark fear of failure. These two men he worked for were already nothing more than characters in his eyes -- their business significated itself. He could see their weaknesses and their shortcomings as a
ut , rich and plentiful , and her complexion waxen -- cream wax -- -with lips of faint pink , and eyes that varied from gray to blue and from gray to brown , according to the light in which you saw th
s light , unquestionably , that Cowperwood saw her , for from the beginning he could not keep his eyes off her. In a way , she was aware of this but she did not attach any significance to it. Thorough
ty. '' Not at all. Not at all. I want to do it. I would n't have been happy if I couldn't. '' His eyes had a peculiar , subtle ray in them -- not a gleam. She felt warm toward him , sympathetic , quit
ly broadening , was nearly full grown. His face , because of its full , clear , big , inscrutable eyes , had an expression which was almost babyish. She could not have guessed the depths it veiled. Hi
ank , Jr. , who was the first to arrive , on his knee , looking at his chubby feet , his kindling eyes , his almost formless yet bud-like mouth , and wonder at the process by which children came into
sitate as it drew close , and as it passed , with a peculiar look of uncertainty or wonder in his eyes , fall in behind and march solemnly away to the enlisting quarters. What was it that had caught t
but a solid , reddish-faced man , slightly tanned , with broad shoulders and a solid chest , gray eyes , gray hair , a typically Irish face made wise and calm and undecipherable by much experience. Hi
 tinted. They were pretty girls , healthy , smiling , Celtic , their heads close together , their eyes looking straight out at you. He admired them casually , and fancied they must be Butler's daughte
, she was inclined to balk at restraint in any form. But there was a softness lurking in her blue eyes that was most sympathetic and human. St. Timothy 's and the convent school in Germantown had been
ck. She had a beautiful nose , not sensitive , but straight-cut with small nostril openings , and eyes that were big and yet noticeably sensuous. They were , to him , a pleasing shade of blue-gray-blu
ter was later made an assistant superintendent of the highways department. Here he came under the eyes of Edward Malia Butler , and was slightly useful to him. Then the central political committee , w
 person of about thirty-five at this time -- lean and somewhat forceful , with black hair , black eyes , and an inordinately large black mustache. He was dapper , inclined to noticeable clothing -- a
no fool financially. He was big and rather doleful to look upon , with sandy brown hair and brown eyes , but fairly intelligent , and absolutely willing to approve anything which was not too broad in
She was a stout , broad-faced woman , smiling-mouthed most of the time , with blurry , gray Irish eyes , and a touch of red in her hair , now modified by grayness. Her cheek , below the mouth , on the
 near and look at her in a warm friendly fashion. '' Well , Aileen '' -- she could see his genial eyes -- '' how is it with you ? How are your father and mother ? Been out driving ? That 's fine. I sa
e could not be said to be homely. She was small and dark , with a turned-up nose , snapping black eyes , a pert , inquisitive , intelligent , and alas , somewhat critical , air. She had considerable t
y , as did a red rose in her hair. She had smooth , white well-rounded arms and shoulders. Bright eyes , a pert manner , clever remarks -- these assisted to create an illusion of charm , though , as s
rom her arm the black satin ribbon which held her train and kicked the skirts loose and free. Her eyes gleamed almost pleadingly for all her hauteur , like a spirited collie 's , and her even teeth sh
ried on the cream-colored satin first , however , being in much doubt about it ; but her penciled eyes and beauty-spot did not seem to harmonize with it. Then she put on the black silk with its gliste
cately constructed , gold-tinted chairs about the walls and behind palms. He looked down into her eyes -- those excited , life-loving , eager eyes. '' You 're quite full up. Let me see. Nine , ten , e
 's called. You 're darling. I'm afraid of you. '' He shot a level , interpretive glance into her eyes , then left. Aileen 's bosom heaved. It was hard to breathe sometimes in this warm air. While he
- but emotionally. She seemed so intensely alive. She passed close to him a number of times , her eyes wide and smiling , her lips parted , her teeth agleam , and he felt a stirring of sympathy and co
e this particular remark a serious turn ; but , now that she was so near him , he looked into her eyes steadily but with a soft appeal and said , `` Yes , why ? '' They had come out from behind the pa
answer , '' he continued. '' Is n't this lovely music ? '' He pressed her fingers. She lifted shy eyes to him now , for , in spite of her gay , aggressive force , she was afraid of him. His personalit
actless , and yet it was anything but tactless. She looked up quickly , directly , but his strong eyes were too much for her. '' Why , yes , '' she answered , as the music stopped , trying to keep an
attracted and compelled , like the glow of a flame to a moth. There was a light of romance in his eyes , which , however governed and controlled -- was directive and almost all-powerful to her. When h
ound it difficult to face Cowperwood 's glazed stare. It was as though there were another pair of eyes behind those they saw , watching through thin , obscuring curtains. You could not tell what he wa
 quickly. Slipping his arms about her waist , he looked at her flushed cheeks , her clear , moist eyes and red mouth. '' You love me ? '' he whispered , stern and compelling because of his desire. ''
 what her lover should be like. He should be strong , handsome , direct , successful , with clear eyes , a ruddy glow of health , and a certain native understanding and sympathy -- a love of life whic
 , her mind running out to a yacht on the sea with him , a palace somewhere -- just they two. Her eyes , half closed , saw this happy world ; and , listening to him , she was fascinated. '' Hanged if
 permitted to see himself as had those who had known him before. An old , nervous shifting of the eyes had almost ceased , and a feeling of restfulness , which had previously been restlessness , and h
would be much more profitable to you. '' '' It would , it would ! '' exclaimed Stener , his round eyes fixed on Cowperwood in a rather helpless , appealing way. He liked Cowperwood and had always been
her serious , '' he said , calmly , to his companions , a cold , commanding force coming into his eyes and voice. To his father he said a little later , `` It 's panic , unless the majority of the ban
t he was not panic-stricken. His naturally even-molded face was set in fine , classic lines ; his eyes were as hard as chilled steel. '' Well , now , '' exclaimed Butler , returning , his countenance
 It was placid , like fine , white wax , and quite as cold ; and those deep , vague , inscrutable eyes ! So Chicago was burning. What would happen to him ? Was he very much involved ? He had never tol
ver those big knuckles , and bigger nose , thick and cartilaginous , his large , shaggy-eyebrowed eyes gleamed. His gray , bristly hair stood up stiffly in a short , even growth all over his head. ''
ewhere in every instance. Stener is just a pawn. He moves him around where he pleases. '' Owen 's eyes gleamed avariciously , opposingly. Cowperwood ought to be punished , sold out , driven out of the
 The frontal bone descended in a protruding curve over the nose , and projected solemnly over the eyes , which burned with a shrewd , inquiring gaze. And the nose and mouth and chin below , as well as
er , calmly. `` That might not look so well before election , would it ? '' His shrewd gray Irish eyes looked into Mollenhauer 's , who returned his gaze. '' Where did you get that ? '' queried Mr. Mo
 face was smooth , with a receding jaw. In the other two this feature was prominent. Nor were his eyes as frank as those of Butler , nor as defiant as those of Mollenhauer ; but for subtlety they were
enhauer ; but for subtlety they were unmatched by either -- deep , strange , receding , cavernous eyes which contemplated you as might those of a cat looking out of a dark hole , and suggesting all th
sh-like in his handshake , wan and slightly lackadaisical in his smile , but speaking always with eyes that answered for every defect. '' Av'nin ' , Mark , I 'm glad to see you , '' was Butler 's gree
 money pretty fast out of that and city loans. '' He looked directly into his long-time friend 's eyes , and they smiled. It was the same with Avery Stone , President Davison , and others. They had al
ather shaggy and disheveled , and his side-whiskers anything but decorative. The old gentleman 's eyes were tired , and his face was gray. Cowperwood could see that he was worrying. He looked up from
ngs are bound to turn in a few days. Ca n't you hold out ? Here 's more trouble. '' He raised his eyes to the announcer 's balcony. '' The Eastern and Western Fire Insurance Company of New York announ
had n't told them , it might be different , but this way -- '' He shook his head sadly , his gray eyes filled with a pale distress. '' George , '' replied Cowperwood , who realized now that only the s
yed sent a peculiar chill over Butler's sturdy frame. His jaw instinctively closed , and his gray eyes narrowed. Could this be true ? If it were not , would the author of the letter say so practically
r has happened , so nothing ever will happen. They see their children every day , and through the eyes of affection ; and despite their natural charm and their own strong parental love , the children
nd said , `` Read that. '' Aileen took it , and for a second was relieved to be able to lower her eyes to the paper. Her relief vanished in a second , when she realized how in a moment she would have
ntly , only to come back in a hot , defiant wave. '' Why , what a lie ! '' she said , lifting her eyes to her father's. `` To think that any one should write such a thing of me ! How dare they ! I thi
hought , and he was going to do much to establish her safely. He used to tell her that she had `` eyes like buttons , '' `` feet like a pussy-cat , '' and hands that were `` just five cents' worth , '
 gloved as usual , and her little feet daintily shod. There was a look of girlish distress in her eyes , which , however , she was trying hard to conceal. '' Honey , '' she exclaimed , on seeing him ,
es of despair , but there was no use admitting it. '' Well ? '' said his father , lifting his sad eyes in a peculiar way. '' Well , it looks like stormy weather , does n't it ? I 've decided to call a
t ruthlessly here and there. She felt it a sort of duty to stay in bed and try to sleep ; but her eyes were quite wide , and her brain hurt her. Hours before Frank had insisted that she should not bot
ere in the offing. He had a longish , thin face of a type that is rather attractive to women. His eyes were blue , his hair brown , with a suggestion of sandy red in it. He had a steady , inscrutable
n of guilt for the treasury defalcation , if any , lay on the banker. The moment Mollenhauer laid eyes on Cowperwood he realized , however , that he had a powerful personality to deal with. Cowperwood
 undoing. His hair had grown very gray in but a few weeks , his step slow , his face pallid , his eyes sunken. His rather showy side-whiskers seemed now like flags or ornaments of a better day that wa
ring throat and neck ; her golden-red hair floated like an aureole about her head , and her large eyes sparkled. The wondrous vigor of a full womanhood was hers -- errant , ill-balanced , romantic , b
peared. She was tall , fair , rugged , and not at all unpleasant to look upon. She had light-blue eyes and a genial smile. Long contact with the police and the brutalities of sex in her early life had
her feet. Usually not nervous , to-day , for some reason , she anticipated trouble. Cowperwood 's eyes instantly hardened. '' Do n't be nervous , '' he said , `` no doubt it 's only the servant. I 'll
er , Aileen was now attempting to stare defiantly , to look reproachful , but Butler 's deep gray eyes beneath their shaggy brows revealed such a weight of weariness and despair as even she , in her a
ye won't. Ye can't. Ye love me too much -- surely ye do -- do n't ye ? '' His voice weakened. His eyes almost filled. He paused and put a big , brown , horny hand on Aileen 's arm. She had listened to
o desert her just when she was going to do the thing which would bring them nearer together ? Her eyes clouded , for she was terribly hurt. '' Why , how you talk ! '' she exclaimed. `` You know I wo n
 he would not hurt her feelings for the world ! '' Honey , '' he said , quickly , when he saw her eyes , `` you do n't understand. I want you to do what you want to do. You 've planned this out in ord
se there were present a court clerk -- small , pale , candle-waxy , with colorless milk-and-water eyes , and thin , pork-fat-colored hair and beard , who looked for all the world like an Americanized
ou could have looked at his lean , pedantic body , his frizzled gray hair , his fishy , blue-gray eyes , without any depth of speculation in them , and his nicely modeled but unimportant face , and to
u might choose to make of it -- a door to illegal opportunity ; a cloud of dust to be cast in the eyes of those who might choose , and rightfully , to see ; a veil to be dropped arbitrarily between tr
Judges were fools , as were most other people in this dusty , shifty world. Pah ! His inscrutable eyes took them all in and gave no sign. His only safety lay , he thought , in the magnificent subtley
and dollars in street-railway stocks. There was a stout wholesale grocer , with red cheeks , blue eyes , and flaxen hair , who Cowperwood said he thought was stubborn. He was eliminated. There was a t
f George W. Stener , who came hurrying forward very pale , very flaccid , very tired-looking. His eyes , as he took his seat in the witness-chair , laying his hand on the Bible and swearing to tell th
ful , and thin , firm , even lips. There was the faintest touch of cynical humor in his hard blue eyes at times ; but mostly he was friendly , alert , placid-looking , without seeming in the least sen
find a substitute for George W. Stener and the indifferent leaders of the Republican party in the eyes of the people. '' And here Mr. Steger proceeded boldly and defiantly to outline the entire politi
hing. Therefore he laid his hands firmly on the rail at first , looked the jurors steadily in the eyes for a time , and , having framed a few thoughts in his mind began : '' Now , gentlemen of the jur
fortable. John , '' he called to a sleepy factotum , who appeared from another room , rubbing his eyes , `` is the key to Number Six down here ? '' '' Yes , sir. '' '' Let me have it. '' John disappea
l in a pale-green dress , with red-velvet cuffs and collar. She looked young , slender , gay. Her eyes , complexion and hair were fresh and healthy. She was trifling with a string of coral beads which
? '' '' You mean Aileen ? '' said Cowperwood , looking at him with steady , curious , unrevealing eyes , and merely interpolating this to obtain a moment for reflection. `` What can I tell you about h
sfactory without marriage in view. And even if he , Cowperwood , was a convicted embezzler in the eyes of the public , that did not make him so. He might get free and restore himself -- would certainl
 to a finish -- putting himself where he had been before the fire ; rehabilitating himself in the eyes of the public. He felt that he could do it , too , if he were not actually sent to prison for a l
 dollars some time if they had let me go. Now they can whistle ! '' He set his teeth and his gray eyes fairly snapped their determination. '' Well , I 've done all I can , Frank , '' pleaded Steger ,
ream-colored gown of rich silk , with dark brown trimmings -- a fetching combination for her. Her eyes were a little hollow , and reddish about the rims , but otherwise she showed no sign of her keen
tled down the steps and was gone. She turned back to the table , her left hand to her mouth , her eyes in a queer , hazy , melancholy mist. Could it be , she thought , that life could really come to t
 bosom began to heave , her throat contracted in four or five short , sharp , aching spasms , her eyes burned , and she shook in a vigorous , anguished , desperate , almost one might have said dry-eye
 was he to be soothed and comforted by the ignorant and yet all embracing volume of her love. Her eyes these days ! The eager , burning quest of him and his happiness that blazed in them. To think tha
 , kindest , handsomest man in the world. Oh , did n't she know ! And Cowperwood , looking in her eyes and realizing this reasonless , if so comforting fever for him , smiled and was touched. Such lov
tly. '' That 's right , '' he returned , and leaned over and kissed her mouth tenderly. `` Button eyes , '' he said. Mrs. Cowperwood sighed after he had gone. `` Everything for the children , nothing
loor , a none too prepossessing drunkard or town ne'er-do-well who looked down on him with bleary eyes , unkempt hair , and a sodden , waxy , pallid face , and called -- for it was summer and the jail
eceiving overseer of the prison -- a thin , practical , executive-looking person with narrow gray eyes and light hair , took the paper which the sheriff 's deputy handed him and read it. This was his
ive in its size and shape to Cowperwood. He could not help thinking how uncanny the man 's squint eyes looked under its straight outstanding visor. The trusty had a silly , sycophantic manner of raisi
 the cap. For this he was properly grateful. He now considered his superior with nervous dog-like eyes , and looked at Cowperwood with a certain cunning appreciation of his lot and a show of initial m
n measuring Cowperwood's arms , legs , chest , waist , hips , etc. He called out the color of his eyes , his hair , his mustache , and , looking into his mouth , exclaimed , '' Teeth , all sound. '' A
 off an unpleasant odor which filled the cell. The floor was of stone. Cowperwood 's clear-seeing eyes took it all in at a glance. He noted the hard cell door , which was barred and cross-barred with
d , iron-gray hair , and a bristly iron-gray mustache , very short , keen , intelligent blue-gray eyes ; a florid complexion ; and even-edged , savage-looking teeth , which showed the least bit in a s
irt , and the wretched cell , he was impressed. Instead of the weak , anaemic body and the shifty eyes of the average prisoner , he saw a man whose face and form blazed energy and power , and whose vi
that any form should have appeared at his door , and looked at him with large , clear , examining eyes -- those eyes that in the past had inspired so much confidence and surety in all those who had kn
should have appeared at his door , and looked at him with large , clear , examining eyes -- those eyes that in the past had inspired so much confidence and surety in all those who had known him. Desma
 pulled his still shaking body tighter , and with her free hand caressed his head. She kissed his eyes , his hair , his cheeks. He pulled himself loose again after a moment , exclaiming , `` What the
d grown on him in the years of his prosperity of putting his hand to his mouth and of opening his eyes in an assumption of surprise , which had no basis in fact , now grew upon him. He really degenera
ake some demonstration of astonishment or wrath : but when she looked into his steady , examining eyes , so free from the illusion of or interest in demonstrations of any kind , she realized how usele
 You 're worthy of just such a woman as you 're getting. The idea ! '' Suddenly tears came to her eyes , and she flounced scornfully and yet sorrowfully out. Cowperwood stood there. At least there wou
eager to avoid it. He was not exceptionally brave and looked it. His hair was straw-colored , his eyes blue , and his cheeks pink. `` Why -- nothing in particular. Who said I was talking about her ? '
fashioning the snare , but he will not believe it. His feet are in the trap of circumstance ; his eyes are on an illusion. Mycteroperca moving in its dark world of green waters is as fine an illustrat