eye instances: `squid; stock exchange; senators; moments in which Frank is evaluated

lobster eye; important point is you don’t know where it’s looking. Reveals the double-function of the eye: on one hand it is the means of the lobster’s dominance (the thing the squid cannot escape), but it is also a way of reading---or the embodied failure to read---the lobster. The inscrutability of the lobster’s eye embody, to Cowperwood, its dominance over the squid, the eyes of which remain un-described. Just what these eyes actually indicate in the end, however, remains open to question. At first Cowperwood’s view seems to voice a simplistic belief in natural hierarchy, a hierarchy determined here by relative inscrutability. But quickly afterward, Cowperwood complicates his own hasty acceptance of this inevitable and “natural” hierarchy, pointing out that “[quote about conditions determining victory]”(). This fecund and often-cited image acts as a key to many of the novel’s thematic questions, setting up the central tension between social Darwinism and a more *systemic* set of determinants, [determinants that are] constructed rather than natural. But what I want to emphasize in this scene is that, in this moment of free indirect discourse, Cowperwood is *himself* a reader, interpreting his found parable according to what it indicates about the world and his own place in it. The relevant eyes here, then, are not just the lobster’s and the squid’s; Cowperwood’s own gaze, the gaze that tries---and fails---to read the eyes of the lobster, are just as important. And so, in addition to setting up the lobster’s *eye* as a symbol which, when understood, hierarchizes the novel’s creatures, this scene also sets up the eye as metonym for the act of speculation, speculation on the strategic capacity---and thus the simultaneous value and danger---of the thing observed. 

Moments like this one, in which Cowperwood sees or tries to see the “calculation[s]” in another eye, are repeated again and again in his encounters with other speculators. To understand the relevance of these ocular descriptions, though, we have to consider them in terms of their context as part of a distinctly historical narrative of financial speculation in the nineteenth century. The novel is, as Philip L. Gerber points out, almost a “biography in fictional dress” of Charles T. Yerkes, Jr., an urban rail line baron notorious for his financial and personal excess. In what follows, I will argue that the image of the eye becomes associated with speculative ability, less as a symbol than as a legible *sign* of a person’s inherent (and fixed) potential. The ontology of partial predetermination that this implies, which is often read as social Darwinist, can also be seen as a product of the historical nature of Dreiser’s project, a making-present of history without ever [quite forgetting the significance that comes from foreknowledge]. The speculative ability of the financiers as indicated by the descriptions of eyes, then, relies on historical consciousness as a means of valuation. [...speculation, financial; also history and determination; ontology of predetermined potential]

[large overview, quantitative; show distinction between eye as sign and eye as metonym, basically]

There are too many mentions of the eye to discuss each of them here, but an overview of the one hundred and forty-five total instances of “eye” or “eyes” reveals some interesting general trends. As a preface, I should point out that I’ll be ignoring appearances of the eye in several contexts: including the romantic subplots with Aileen and Lilian; many common idioms such as “he caught her eye”; and instances in which only eye-color is mentioned. Each of these situations could be interesting topics for expansion, but I pass over them now because they have separate logics of their own and because doing so allows me to focus on situations in which the eye is relevant to speculation. 

The two functions I alluded to previously, of the singular “eye” as metonym and the plural “eyes” as a legible sign, dominate the appearances of the eye in the novel’s main, financial plot. The singular, metonymic eye appears in a remarkably similar grammatical environment in most cases, modified by an adjective that applies, according to the logic of the metonym, more accutely to the perceiving agent than the eye itself. A few of the many examples make the point: “a very sensible, vigorous eye”; “a shrewd though not highly intelligent eye”; “a speculative eye”; “an interested eye,” “inquiring eye,” even “a cold, fishy eye.” These instances, however, are not necessarily visible to the other characters in the work, and the descriptions can only come from the omniscient narrator. The metonymic singular eye gives us privileged access either to the intention underlying a certain consideration---as in the “speculative eye” and “interested eye”---or, in the context of a physical description, of a character’s inherent nature, as in the “very sensible, vigorous eye” or the “shrewd though not highly intelligent eye.” The plural “eyes” are different primarily in their legibility within the world of Dreiser’s novel, to other characters. Accordingly, the nature of these eyes is usually conveyed with reference to a fixed perspective. This fixed perspective is established in many cases by the general “you,” as in “You could tell nothing by his eyes,” implying an encounter with the viewer; in other cases, it is established narratively through the gaze of another character. By making these traits legible *in* the eyes of one character *through* the eyes of another, Dreiser implies that the traits those eyes indicate are as fixed as physical traits. The intelligence or keenness of a person, in order for it to be definitely apprehensible, must be understood in Dreiser’s world as an objective characteristic.

The significance of this fixity and objectivity becomes clear when it is considered in terms of the financial speculation that constitutes much of the novel’s narrative: the inherent nature that is legible in a person’s eyes becomes a key to a hierarchy of individual potential; this hierarchy is itself integral to the financiers’ calculations, and speculation in commodities or bonds becomes also a speculation in *people*. The novel’s highest term of descriptive praise in this sense is *inscrutability*. Frank himself is frequently described as having “inscrutable eyes” or eyes from which “you could tell nothing.” In other situations, inscrutable eyes are associated with intelligence: the minor character Abner Sengstack, for example, is said to have a “highly intelligent countenance burning with a pair of keen, piercing, inscrutable black eyes.” Inscrutability is directly associated with success among the financiers on the floor of the stock exchange, where Frank observes that the “older men, as a rule, were inscrutable” in contrast to the transparent suspiciousness of the younger brokers. Senator Simpson is perhaps the best exemplar of this trait, and significantly he is the dominant character of the only group that gets the better of Frank. In his physical description, each of his traits is deemphasized and made diminutive, except for his eyes. Though he may be short and “physically unimpressive,” have a smooth face and a “receding jaw,” his eyes hold the key to his true power. “[F]or subtlety they were unmatched by either” Butler or Mollenhauer, his two associates. Dreiser’s description contains Simpson’s dominance in his eyes: they are 

>“deep, strange, receding, cavernous eyes which contemplated you as might those of a cat looking out of a dark hole, and suggesting all the artfulness that has ever distinguished the feline family…there was resident here a strange, resistant, capable force that ruled men.…[He spoke] always with eyes that answered for every defect.” 

Two things stand out about this description stand out and clarify the logic of Dreiser’s hierarchy. First, whatever the force is that allows Simpson to “rul[e] men” is “resident” in eyes that are cavernous and obscured, artful and, like the cat, stealthy. The source of Simpson’s mastery is thus identifiable with the inscrutability detailed above. Second, Dreiser implies a relationship to the food chain and taxonomy by comparing Simpson to a predatory feline, and even uses the language of taxonomy in specifically referring to the “feline *family*.” 



It is not until the description of Senator Simpson, a clearly dominant figure and the only one who ever seems a match for Frank, that inscrutability is established as the apex of development for the speculative eye. This fact points to a correlation between external opacity and inherent dominance: the expert speculator is not him- or herself subject to speculation by other, lesser figures. [roll into previous ‘graph?---would be extending this signfier/metonym dyad into this paragraph, so probably good.]

>A more interesting type of his kind than Senator Mark Simpson never flourished in the State of Pennsylvania, which has been productive of interesting types. Contrasted with either of the two men who now greeted him warmly and shook his hand, he was physically unimpressive. He was small--five feet nine inches, to Mollenhauer's six feet and Butler's five feet eleven inches and a half, and then his face was smooth, with a receding jaw. In the other two this feature was prominent. Nor were his eyes as frank as those of Butler, nor as defiant as those of Mollenhauer; but for subtlety they were unmatched by either--deep, strange, receding, cavernous eyes which contemplated you as might those of a cat looking out of a dark hole, and suggesting all the artfulness that has ever distinguished the feline family. He had a strange mop of black hair sweeping down over a fine, low, white forehead, and a skin as pale and bluish as poor health might make it; but there was, nevertheless, resident here a strange, resistant, capable force that ruled men--the subtlety with which he knew how to feed cupidity with hope and gain and the ruthlessness with which he repaid those who said him nay. He was a still man, as such a man might well have been--feeble and fish-like in his handshake, wan and slightly lackadaisical in his smile, but speaking always with eyes that answered for every defect.

In turning the eyes of others onto Frank, Dreiser establishes the inevitability of his protagonist’s rise as legible in his physical person, implying an ontology in which a person’s greatest possible achievement is a fixed essence. [look at descriptions of Frank, and his eye(s) if possible, to demonstrate inherent potential as ontological fact; Frank working his first job; Frank in prison later; others?]

>

In order for this essentialism to be explained, [? are there other explanations I’ll have to counter?] we have to understand Dreiser as a simultaneous reader and author---a reader of Charles T. Yerkes, Jr.’s life as a financier and an author of his fictionalized account; considering Dreiser’s authorship of the speculative exchanges in the Financier reveals that his own historical consciousness---his foreknowledge of the “end of the story” and his status as a kind of historian---is the source of the financier’s semi-mystical quality of speculation in individual potential. [look at use of sources, I actually don’t know how the hell to go about arguing this. Maybe conclude here, with this as payoff/interpretation of everything that has come before, with real dénouement-type conclusion

Conc

[^1]: As might be expected, the eye works somewhat differently in different environments, and most particularly in the romantic subplots with Lilian and Aileen. These appearances will not be widely discussed in this paper, but briefly they can be described as communicative glances and indications of temporary emotional state. In these situations ...