---
title: Inscrutable Eyes&#58; Physical Description, Speculation, and Historical Consciousness in *The Financier*
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
profname: Austin Graham
coursename: American Fiction as American History
date: April 18, 2014
fontsize: 12pt
---

A peculiar image appears in the first chapter of *The Financier*, Theodore Dreiser’s 1912 novel about financial speculation around the 1871 economic crisis. The image is of a young man, Frank Cowperwood, watching a tank that contains a lobster and a squid and waiting to see if the lobster will be able to catch its prey. The lobster, we are told, “lay at the bottom of the clear glass tank on the yellow sand, apparently seeing nothing---you could not tell in which way his beady, black buttons of eyes were looking---but apparently they were never off the body of the squid.” Frank returns to find the squid finally devoured, and one bystander tells him that though the squid tried to back away, the lobster “calculated” on that (5). In response, Frank muses, “‘That’s the way it has to be, I guess.…That squid wasn’t quick enough.’”

This passage has been a popular point of discussion on *The Financier*, and it offers many possible directions for interpretation. But I would like to emphasize one theme in particular that this image introduces: eyes as they relate to speculation. The lobster’s untraceable “black button eyes” embody, to Cowperwood, its dominance over the squid, which is contrastingly governed by frantic movement. Just what these eyes finally indicate, however, remains open to question. They could point to superiority according to natural law, and at first the young Cowperwood seems to voice this simplistic belief in a natural hierarchy. But soon after he raises this possibility, he complicates it, saying that “‘The squid couldn’t kill the lobster---he had no weapon. The lobster could kill the squid---he was heavily armed. There was nothing for the squid to feed on; the lobster had the squid as prey.…He didn’t have a chance’” (5). Far from positing an uncomplicated hierarchy, this passage sets up a central tension between social Darwinism and a more *systemic* set of determinants that are constructed rather than natural. But it is essential to note as well that, in this moment, Cowperwood is *himself* a reader, interpreting his found parable according to what it indicates about the world and his own place in it. The relevant eyes here are not just the lobster’s and the squid’s; Cowperwood’s own gaze, the gaze that tries---and fails---to read the eyes of the lobster, is just as important. And so, in addition to setting up the lobster’s *eyes* as signs, which, when read, indicate the creature’s place in the natural order, this scene also sets up the eye as a metonym for the act of speculation itself.

This double function of the eyes---as metonym when singular and as signs when plural---persists throughout the novel, and in what follows, I will trace this distinction to show how financial speculation occurs in tandem with physical description. To understand the relevance of these descriptions we have to consider them in terms of their context as part of a distinctly historical narrative of finance in the nineteenth century: after all, the novel is, as Philip L. Gerber points out, almost a “biography in fictional dress” of Charles T. Yerkes, Jr., an urban rail line baron notorious for his financial and personal excess (Gerber 117). In this light, we see that the predetermination implied by the readability of physical attributes results from the historical nature of Dreiser’s project. Through images of eyes, Dreiser shows that financial speculation is a kind of history in reverse, the mirror image of the historical novelist’s task: both entail the projection of a narrative across a temporal divide based on traces and fragments, one constructing a vision of the future, the other attempting to reconstruct an absent present. The speculators in Cowperwood’s present, then, become voices of the inverted historical gaze itself.

There are too many mentions of the eye to discuss each of them here, but an overview of the many appearances of the eye reveals some interesting general trends.^[I am excluding appearances of the eye in several contexts: including the romantic subplots with Aileen and Lilian; many common idioms such as “he caught her eye”; and instances in which only eye-color is mentioned. Each of these situations could be interesting topics for expansion, but I pass over them now because they have separate logics of their own and because doing so allows me to focus on situations in which the eye is relevant to speculation.] The two functions I alluded to previously, of the singular “eye” as metonym and the plural “eyes” as legible signs, dominate in the novel’s financial contexts. 

The singular eye appears in a remarkably similar grammatical environment in most cases: modified by an adjective that applies more accurately to the perceiving agent than to the eye itself. A few of the many examples will illustrate the point: “a very sensible, vigorous eye”; “a shrewd though not highly intelligent eye”; “a speculative eye”---“an interested eye,” “inquiring eye,” even “a cold, fishy eye.” These features are not apparently visible to the other characters in the work, and the descriptions come from the omniscient narrator, without free indirect discourse. The metonymic singular eye, in these and other instances, gives us privileged access to the minds of the characters. Sometimes it lets us see the intention underlying a certain appraisal. At other points, as in the context of a physical description, the eye reveals a character’s inherent nature. 

The plural “eyes” differ primarily in that they are legible to other characters. Accordingly, the nature of these eyes is usually described from a fixed perspective. This fixed perspective is established in many cases by the general “you,” as in “You could tell nothing by his eyes,” implying an encounter with the viewer; in other cases, it is established narratively through the gaze of another character. Frequently non-physical descriptions are imbricated with physical descriptions to show that abstract traits are as legible as, say, eye color. Some examples include: “his fishy, blue-gray eyes, without any depth of speculation in them”; “Those large, clear gray eyes were full of intelligence”; and “keen, intelligent blue-gray eyes.” By making these traits legible *in* the *eyes* of one character *through* the *eye* of another, Dreiser implies that the traits the plural eyes indicate are stable and able to be perceived---and in order for this to be true, these traits must be understood as objective and fixed.

The significance of this fixity becomes clear when it is considered in terms of the financial speculation that constitutes much of the novel’s narrative: the inherent nature that is legible in people’s eyes indicates their place in a hierarchy of individual potency. The novel’s highest term of descriptive praise in this sense is *inscrutability*. Frank himself is frequently described as having “inscrutable eyes” or eyes from which “you could tell nothing.” In other situations, inscrutable eyes are associated with intelligence: the minor character Abner Sengstack, for example, is said to have a “highly intelligent countenance burning with a pair of keen, piercing, inscrutable black eyes.” Inscrutability in a financier is directly associated with success on the floor of the stock exchange, where Frank observes that the “older men, as a rule, were inscrutable” in contrast to the transparent suspicion of the younger brokers. Senator Simpson is perhaps the best exemplar of this trait, and significantly he leads the only group that gets the better of Frank. In Simpson’s physical description, each of his traits is deemphasized and made diminutive, except for his eyes. Though he may be short and “physically unimpressive,” have a smooth face and a “receding jaw,” his eyes hold the key to his true power: they are

>deep, strange, receding, cavernous eyes which contemplated you as might those of a cat looking out of a dark hole, and suggesting all the artfulness that has ever distinguished the feline family…there was resident here a strange, resistant, capable force that ruled men.…[He spoke] always with eyes that answered for every defect. 

Two things stand out about this description and clarify the logic of Dreiser’s hierarchy. First, whatever force Simpson has that allows him to “rul[e] men” is “resident” in eyes that are cavernous and obscured, artful and, like the cat itself, stealthy. The source of Simpson’s mastery is therefore identifiable with his inscrutability. Second, Dreiser implies a relationship to the food chain and to taxonomy by comparing Simpson to a predatory cat, and even uses the language of taxonomy specifically, referring to the feline “*family*.” To read a character’s power through the eyes is presented as an act of taxonomic recognition, and this recognition organizes the triumphs and defeats of the novel’s financial plot.

But what would it mean to be able to assess a person’s power, the maximum of their potential, by looking into their eyes? What does it say about the ontology of Dreiser’s world that such traits are presented as fixed, like an organisms physical features or species? Peculiarly, the potential of a person is rendered here as more stable an object of speculation than is a commodity or a stock. This is one of Frank’s first lessons on the trading floor. Where it is, he is told, “useless…to try to figure out exactly why stocks rose and fell,” by the end of his first months as a trader he has “sized up these men shrewdly, judging some to be weak, some foolish, some clever, some slow, but in the main small-minded or deficient because they were agents, tools, or gamblers.” Frank sees, in contrast, that a “real man—a financier—was never a tool. He used tools. He created. He led.” The role of the financier, then, may be to “be in the right place when a crisis comes,” as Walter Benn Michaels has put it (77). But the way they *figure out* where to be is by looking into the eyes of those around them, to find the weak and the strong, and thereby to tap into the natural order of things that determines the crisis. If this is so, the victors in such a crisis are not like the predator that subdues its prey. Bruce Robbins has argued that “[p]eople, who live on lobsters, have placed lobster and squid in the tank together, and it is presumably those people who benefit in some sense from the competition in which they themselves do not participate” (122). This is certainly true. But the construction of a beneficial environment comes *after* an accurate taxonomic *reading*, and understanding of the predatory relationship that leads to profit. (Recall that in the parable of the lobster and the squid, Frank is solely a reader.) The triumph of the financier is the triumph of the taxonomist, who identifies by certain traits or signs the way a larger system works. And the extent to which that taxonomist succeeds is a measure of the extent to which he or she is truly outside the system of gain and loss, whether manipulating that system or watching it for the proper signs. 

Considering this sense of externality, of the financier as not so much a player as a gambling spectator, one can see a relationship between the task of the speculator and the task of the historian---*or* the historical novelist. Both stand at some level of remove from a system in order to understand it, and, if we take Dreiser as a kind of historian, both find the right place to situate themselves to gain something from the movement of what, in hindsight, becomes economic history. As I’ve said, speculation in *The Financier* often appears to be a kind of history in reverse. Individual data, traces, become the means of constructing a narrative or a systematic relation of parts, no matter whether the purpose of that construction is contribution to knowledge or massive profit. Just as we consider Cowperwood as a reader of systems and destinies as he watches the lobster lying in wait for the squid, so should we think of Dreiser as a historical reader. In doing so, we must ask how Dreiser’s own reading of historical documents informs the reading ability he puts in the eyes of his speculating characters. 

As might be expected, this correlation makes itself most clear in the moments when the speculator and the historical author share a subject---that is, when Cowperwood himself is the object of speculation. And indeed, the veteran financiers bring the young Cowperwood into the fold because of some perceived value that lurks in his eyes, and they do so with a sense of foreknowledge at which they themselves marvel. There are several ways to take this foreknowledge. One way is to suppose that they are helpless in the face of an historical figure, that predestination is indeed a rule of Dreiser’s world and that they give Cowperwood an opportunity to succeed because he is fated to---somehow. Another possibility is to suggest that they are speculating in Cowperwood’s stock, as it were, that he is a commodity they can make use of and profit from, and their ability as financiers allows them to see a good investment. I suggest, however, that it is some combination of the two. If the forward-looking speculation in people is narrated as a reading of a person’s fixed essence or of preordained inevitabilities, it is because expert speculation is Dreiser’s way of narrativizing his own historical consciousness. In other words, Dreiser narrates his task as a historian, first, by allowing his financiers to see the future through the singular “eye” of speculation, and second, by allowing that future to be legible the plural “eyes” of a fixed potential. The fixity of such a future makes it nothing but history seen from within. And so, in the novel, instead of seeing Dreiser looking back at the past of the financiers, we see the financiers looking forward to the future of *Dreiser*’s present, in which their actions have become history.

I will conclude, as the novel does, with a “Magic Crystal”: after Frank and Aileen depart cinematically on a train to Chicago, two brief essays follow, the first called “Mycteroperca Bonaci,” or the black grouper by another name, and the second called the “Magic Crystal.” The latter suggests what we might see if we were to gaze into a magic crystal at the moment of the train’s departure, suggesting that it would be a vision of Frank’s successes concluding in “sorrow, sorrow, sorrow.” The Weird Sisters of *Macbeth* then appear, implicitly bringing with them a narrative of hubris and inevitable resultant failure. As Austin Graham points out, “the ability to see this inevitability is not hampered but rather enhanced by the several, historiographically distinct views of Cowperwood at novel’s end.” And in addition, the intervention of historiography at all shows something important about Dreiser’s process and his willingness to let the historian’s task intervene in the author’s. The omniscient voice, which speaks directly only occasionally throughout the novel, appears and evaluates the prophecies of the Weird Sisters, saying of one prophecy that “they would have lied” and of another that “it would have been true,” concluding with a resolving invokation of speculation itself, in the form of the question: “What wise man might not read from such a beginning, such an end?” These intervening statements of truth and falsity establish a position of absolute knowledge, short-circuiting prophecy with another form of surer prediction---the historian’s position looking backward, embodied in that omniscient narrative voice. But the question that concludes suggests that the act of looking forward, of *reading*, of speculating, can also be a sure form of knowing. Speculation, like the privileged look backward, leads to the *correct* solution, not to the ambiguous multiplicity of prophecy. This move unites several modes of knowing that run through *The Financier*: speculation, taxonomization, and the submerged historical consciousness. But it finally represents a legibility of the future in the present, a surety of “reading” at a glance, that defines speculation and defines what the financiers see in each others eyes. Far from windows to the soul, the eyes in Dreiser are windows to the future, and, at the same time, to history.

[^1]: As might be expected, the eye works somewhat differently in different environments, and most particularly in the romantic subplots with Lilian and Aileen. These appearances will not be widely discussed in this paper, but briefly they can be described as communicative glances and indications of temporary emotional state. 