---
title: *The Space of Things*, something something something
---

This paper will combine digital mapping with textual analysis to show that Karen Tei Yamashita's first novel, *Through the Arc of the Rainforest*, creates a form of subjectivity mediated by objects, environment, space, and markets in complex interrelation. The result is a radical, materialist extension of the individual in which one becomes coterminous with the systems with which one interacts, in terms of both consciousness and action. 

In the first place, human, thing, and environment are defined dialogically throughout the novel. All of the major characters have unique attachments to the *things* that put them in motion or into circulation: a ball floats forever in front of Kazumasa Ishimaru's forehead, reacting to material abnormalities and gaining him international employment; other characters command extra limbs, networks of courier pigeons, or (allegedly) magical feathers, which either circulate themselves or put their owners in contact with circulation. Human interaction with space is mediated by such objects that act as both prosthetics and commodities, augmenting the powers of the individual while also keying into market structures and networks of circulation. In addition, the environmental implications of this object-oriented spatial paradigm are enormous. This treatment of space culminates in the Matacão, a mass of congealed plastic with peculiar physical properties that is the product of human detritus, seeping underground to occupy untouched space. Through this uniquely object-oriented subjectivity, individual augmentation, market systems, and environment are linked under a single understanding. These mutually determining relationships result in a concept of space that I am calling the *space of things*, which sits conceptually between the "space of flows" and "space of places": things, and through them people, become incorporated in "flows" and become more influential the less they are rooted to a particular territory (as in Manuel Castells's and Zygmunt Bauman's uses of the two terms); but they also mediate relationships with "places" in their production, use, and disposal. 

This paper will focus on the "space of things" as it relates to just one of the characters, Kazumasa, arguing that his particular prosthesis-commodity incorporates him into the material flows associated with commodity circulation and the global environment while also determining his interaction with immaterial systems of markets and communication. His floating plastic ball, the objectification of both his labor power, identity, and material consciousness, allows him to detect Matacão deposits, which stand in for the product of human influence on environment. The topic of this paper is meant to stand on its own, but it is also an argument-by-example for mapping as a critical methodology when considering environmental and spatial premises in ecologically conscious speculative fiction. Speculative conceits of this kind frequently involve the creations of new spatial modalities that instantiate new subjectivities and understandings of identity. Mapping, then, can be a way to tease out the character and implications of these new identities on space and environment. This methodological angle will serve as a frame and occasion for my engagement with the novel.
