---
title: Nullsec Utopia - Journalism in *EVE Online*
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
date: 17 Dec. 2013
...

Though perhaps not the best known MMORPG[^a] in the world at large, *EVE Online* is one of the most notorious within the online gaming community. It is probably also the best known science fiction title in a genre that is dominated by fantasy titles like *World of Warcraft*. But as the age of *WoW* passes,[^b] *EVE* may come to define the genre as a whole to a greater extent: it has 500,000 users and counting despite the notorious learning curve, and its users are known for sticking around (Griffiths). In *EVE*, players are known as "capsuleers," in reference to the capsules that allow them to travel from ship to ship. Capsuleers have virtual human avatars, but almost all of their interactions occur through their ships, which are dauntingly customizable and appear as countless models with as many different functions. Though there are early missions built into the game to help new capsuleers assimilate, there is no predetermined point to *EVE*, even less so than in other "sandbox" games. Capsuleers decide what sounds like the most fun---whether mining, trading, exploring uncharted space, or preying on other capsuleers for their loot---and gradually gather the equipment and connections they need to play as they want to. What makes *EVE* distinctive and gets it the most coverage in gaming and mainstream media is the prevalence of its player-run corporations and coalitions. These are groups that assemble mostly through forums and IRC chat interfaces, and their goals differ from group to group. Many of the corporations are just trying to make as much ISK[^c] as possible through mining, trade, and control of star systems. Some coalitions become pirate groups, robbing lone capsuleers of their hard-won ships and the goods they carry. Some, like the Goonswarm and its subsidiaries, formed in order to wreak as much havoc as possible before becoming just another part of the game. This freedom and the infinite multiplicity of playing styles have become the cruxes of *EVE*'s draw, and the universe becomes richer as these possibilities increase.

To define *EVE* only according to what happens between ships in the simulated depths of space, though, is to miss half of the game's culture: many forms of writing have emerged around *EVE* that expand the game's universe, and a spontaneous capsuleer press corps has emerged, reporting on events in the game and the actions of the company that produces it. The many forms and media of writing include forum postings, fan-fiction, personal blogs, and other platforms for retelling in-game experiences. What is the role of this journalism in the community, though? And what does it change about the game and its world? In the first section of this paper, I will examine these emerging forms of writing in relation to each other in order to isolate the capsuleer journalism that is so pervasive in the extended *EVE* community. Having identified and defined it, I will continue in the second section to consider the relationship between writing and action in virtual space, asking how this form of journalism influences the social structures that define the game and contribute to the construction of this virtual space. Placing the concepts of the public sphere and the hyperreal in the context of online gaming and virtual realities, I will argue that capsuleer journalism has redefined *EVE* as a virtual, simulated of utopian project in which individual agency and political action are actually constitutive of material reality. The game becomes a participatory society determined in large part by the sum of individual experiences rather than the actions only of those who hold material power.

#Forms of Writing in *EVE*

The forms of writing that have appeared as supplements to *EVE*, from fan-fiction in the forums to news sites reporting on in-game events, even to pieces in *Forbes* and *The Huffington Post*, differ in many senses, and determining their genres can be difficult. Some sources are avowedly fictional, while others report on *EVE* only when its events affect the world beyond the game. Some are intelligible to the lay reader, while others are so jargon-heavy as to be intelligible only to the veteran capsuleer, or at any rate someone who has spent enough time reading the forums. The three types of journalism that distinguish themselves in the world of *EVE* are defined best by their audiences: non-gamer, non-capsuleer journalism; gamer, non-capsuleer journalism; and capsuleer journalism. The first reports on events that in some way interact with the non-game world, usually through converted currency. The second reports on in-game events as essentially non-fictional, and serves as a portal for gamers who are interested in the game world but are unable or unwilling to enter it.[^1] The final form of journalism is distinctly by and for capsuleers, reporting on game events as non-fictional insofar as they are defined by the actions of the player.[^1.1] This final type of journalism, which will be the main focus of my inquiry, participates in and influences in-game politics and discourse, and as such its journalistic function mirrors that non-*EVE* journalism.

There are comparatively few articles on *EVE* in non-gamer publications, and as a result a common denominator emerges rather quickly: they generally require some point of convergence between events in *EVE* and events in the world beyond. In most cases, this portal is a literal conversion of currency. In a *Forbes* article from December 2013 marking the release of an *EVE* expansion, for example, Daniel Nye Griffiths begins with a nod to the "tens of thousands of dollars poured into beautiful battleships which are then reduced to scrap" and a Ponzi scheme that notoriously robbed investors of the equivalent of $20,000 USD ("'Eve Online' Crosses the Rubicon"). His is a common example: tales of financial loss make a majority of non-gamer reporting on *EVE* events.[^2] A counterexample to this focus on financial loss was an in-game fundraiser for hurricane relief, which led to over $190,000 USD in donations (Guthrie).[^3] Not all examples of interaction between the in- and out-of-game worlds are financial, however. When Sean Smith, a State Department employee known in *EVE* as "Vile Rat," was killed in the attach on a U.S. Embassy in Bengazi, journalistic worlds collided. Notorious right-wing news reporter Glenn Beck drew dubious parallels between the CIA and the in-game guild Goonswarm (Beck), and other reporters noted Smith's communication to his *EVE* associates that he was unsure whether he would survive the night (Benedetti). Meanwhile, capsuleer and non-capsuleer gamer-journalists were eulogizing Vile Rat for his in-game accomplishments, which were, according to those who admired him, legendary (Mittani, Totilo). What propelled this story (and *EVE*) into the mainstream and mainstream-gaming news outlets was the relevance to non-game political events. Politics and finances act as links between the world of capsuleers and the mainstream media.[^3.1]

The general gaming media tends to report on these events of financial and political import (usually with a different angle), but they also cover the largest events within the game and occasionally offer strategic columns for a general (or newbie) capsuleer audience. Sites like *Kotaku* (of the *Gawker* empire) and *Joystiq*'s MMO section *Massively* are likely to approach *EVE* from the perspective of consumer journalism, reviewing expansions and covering the actions of the game's creator, CCP. Exceptions are columns like *Massively*'s "Eve Evolved," which writes about capsuleer concerns in a jargon-free, accessible style inviting to non-capsuleers. Sites such as these tend to post videos and GIFs that are valuable to the non-capsuleer for their simple shock-and-awe value as well as their glimpse of the larger universe (of which they are likely not a part if they are reading these general accounts). But because their audience seems to go beyond the discursive sphere of *EVE*, this genre is distinguishable from capsuleer journalism.

These types of *EVE*-related journalism bear almost no stylistic similarity to capsuleer journalism, which is inaccessibly laden with jargon and constitutes what Mia Consalvo calls "paratexts" of gaming (qtd. in Page 247); though occurring outside of the game's chat interface, this form of writing is a type of in-game political discourse and is definitional of the game space itself. Ship names and types obscure the textual representations of online battles, and without some introductory knowledge the articles remain more or less impenetrable: in a short battle report by Peach Tea, for example, the following sentence appears: "DY-P7Q tonight lit up as numbers in local climbed up to nearly 1700+ with carriers, dreadnoughts, and titans alike bridging into the system" ("DY-P7Q"). Inferring ship and sector names where possible makes the sentence understandable, but without deep contextual knowledge the significance of such a regional conflict is impossible to grasp. Another article posted the same week details a failed maneuver by members of Goonswarm. It is similarly obfuscated by game jargon, but illustrates several trends in capsuleer journalism: the author, Free, provides some narrative context---"The freighter pilot in question tequilasunrise was bridged into a cyno in 1P- where a N3PL cyno alt was watching resulting in the quick termination of the freighter and the egg it was carrying"---before continuing to quote chat logs from The Mittani, a well known member of Goonswarm who was attempting to absolve himself of blame for the incident. Free continues to detail The Mittani's actions on Twitter and a forum (Free). What in this post is so typical of much capsuleer journalism is its focus on notorious player personalities, its reference to the actions of major alliances, and its reporting from a position immersed in the world of the game but with references to the peripheral platforms on the rest of the Internet. Though the focus of this reporting is on events in the world of the game, it does not pretend that the world outside the game does not exist, nor does it limit its sources to those contained in the game's interface.

In addition to reporting on the political happenings of *EVE*, capsuleer journalism also tends to be involved in political controversy, revealing the extent to which this writing becomes a form of political participation.[^3.2] When I went on the forums to ask more experienced capsuleers what sites they use, I was quickly presented with one such controversy. Two responses referred to one of the major *EVE* news sites, *The Mittani*, in terms hostile to its perceived bias. One user chastised another user's recommendation of the site, saying, "Also known as Goons News Network where every pubbie click helps to support it," while a second user recommended the site with the caveat: "if I desperately want to read Goonswarm-biased EVE news. (I don't)[.]" This controversy in particular is inherently related to the political role of paratextual discourse in the *EVE* community. In June of 2006, a group of users who had organized on the notoriously-trolly website *Something Awful* entered *EVE* en masse in order to "break" it with practices that would make it less fun for everyone. They formed a group called "Goonswarm," but far from breaking the game, they ended up being a powerful force within it that still operates to this day---Sean Smith, or "Vile Rat" of the Bengazi attack, was a high-ranking member in the group, and the strength of the community outpouring commemorating his actions in *EVE* bears testament to the extent to which Goonswarm has become a defining part of *EVE* (Totilo). The reason that Goonswarm is such an interesting case study is that their presence originated, expanded, and operates as much in the discursive, paratextual side of *EVE* as in its ludic mainline. The pejorative "forum warriors" is often used to distinguish them as players whose activity on the forums is seen as more influential than their activity in nullsec, or the "null-security" space where battles occur. This characterization, as well as their point of origin being yet another forum, shows the extent to which written discourse is a binding agent of one of the most influential communities in *EVE*. *The Mittani*, the news outlet that is allegedly biased in the Goonswarm's favor and is named after a famous eponymous Goon, brings both political capital to the group (insofar as the evaluation of its bias is valid) and financial capital to the sites owners (who are members of Goonswarm).[^4] Extra-game discourse has served an important organizational function for the group, but it has also been used as a way to establish presence and influence in a universe that is mostly social.

Capsuleer journalism in *EVE* acts as a supplement to and distillation of the discourse in the forums and other sites of capsuleer discussion. It reports on this discourse as part of the world of *EVE*, but it also consolidates the discussion into articulable biases and distinct political postures. This journalism in part acts as a form that grants political influence through representation, and is thus distinguished from other forms of reporting in *EVE* in the extent to which it participates in the world that it represents. Though it is largely representing the "text" of the game and the "paratext" of the discussions around it, it becomes itself a part of the game.

#CCP and Capsuleers, the Material and the Semiotic

Much of *EVE* may be social, but it is important not to lose sight of the limited scope of paratext in the world of *EVE*; though the most influential actions in the game require enormous coordination and organization in order to be carried out, the medium through which those actions occur is programmatically determined. There is a daunting but still finite number of actions possible in what Alex Galloway has in another context called the "diegetic space" of the game---the space where ships blow each other up and planets float into view (Galloway 941). Without that diegetic space, the game becomes less a game than a collective fantasy. The "material" basis of the game is defined by the things one is able to do. The criticism of the Goonswarm as "forum warriors" actually refers to a stratum deeper than the purely behavioral or ability-based, and is more significant than saying that Goonswarm is "all talk." The criticism refers to a distinction between the material and the immaterial, suggesting that the Goonswarm is not participating in the true "political" struggles of in-game property and currency circulation so much as an extra-material and thus exploitative means of gain. In a sense, they are saying that anything the "forum warriors" have won is ill-gotten, because it comes from outside the diegetic space of the game. This argument establishes diegetic space as a source of authoritative political determination, and exchanges such as these point to an in-game cultural distinction between the semiotic and the material.

The difference between the semiotic and material strata of *EVE* is defined by the source of each sphere's determination: the semiotic space is determined by capsuleers, while the material space is determined by CCP ("Crowd Control Productions," *EVE*'s creator). As the programmers of the diegetic space, CCP is the sole arbiter of materiality and material possibility in the *EVE* world. Their control over the materiality of *EVE* takes two forms. The first is determination of "physical" possibility in the diegetic space: this includes the interface, physical laws of the universe, and the material goods that are available and usable in the game. Thus while the seemingly infinite customizability of *EVE* is one of its main points of attraction, the choices are restricted in the same way that consumer goods are restricted by commodity production. CCP determines the range of commodities available to capsuleers, and could theoretically place limits on the total number of ships, fittings,[^6] and other available points of contact between the user and the diegetic world. Presumably for reasons of functionality and preserving a somewhat level playing field, user mods are not supported, and thus the means by which capsuleers would alter material reality beyond the range permitted by CCP is disallowed. 

The second way that CCP determines the material reality of their universe is by determining the underlying economic and political infrastructure that dictate operations in *EVE*. The economic system is made up of three currencies, ISK, PLEX, and Aurum; the first is only able to be earned in-game, and the other two can be purchased with non-*EVE* currencies and exchanged for ISK on the market. In the political spectrum, the capsuleer government and all non-player corporations (which dictate much of the activity in high-security space and some in low-security space) are managed by CCP. While the social and semiotic elements of the game world are built by capsuleer activity in the diegetic space and the forums, CCP has final control over what of it can be translated into the material action in the game and how it is able to manifest. 

One of the major roles of capsuleer journalism is to mediate between the capsuleer-controlled semiotic space, in which discussions occur and alliances form, and the CCP-controlled, material, diegetic space, in which property and money circulate. Only CCP's frequently stated commitment to providing space and tools by which players can create their own universe, rather than providing the universe in which they can play, allows this power. CCP has been committed from their beginning to letting capsuleer discourse guide their activity and engineering---input from the fan community, actual intellectual labor from capsuleers, even helped them develop the early structures of the game when they were a new company with very little funding and staff (McCormick). Listening to the goings-on in the forums and the feedback at the live conventions that CCP holds several times a year is a major part of the design process for expansions. Though CCP's most direct engagement with user writing is through the forums, forum users frequently link to instances of capsuleer journalism in other outlets, and such conversations often begin or influence threads of discussion. Whether the writers are reporting on the actions of CCP, reporting on in-game events, or commenting on the workings of the game and its community, this writing influences the discussions that become market research and idea mines for the game designers at CCP. Additionally, because many of these sources of journalistic writing are more centralized, accessible, and widely known than emerging threads on the forum (of which there are many every day), their influence on the wider discussion can potentially be much wider than any other discursive element of *EVE*. The semiotic space of *EVE* frequently influences the material space by guiding CCP's development process, and journalism is a major determining factor of activity in the semiotic space.

One major arena of the mediation between the material and semiotic is the different ways that CCP and capsuleers approach the construction of player identity. For its part, CCP uses its official outlets to reinforce a consumerist conception of the construction of identity, one based primarily on purchasing decisions. The CCP-authored player guides generally correspond to the NPC[^8]-driven corporations, which exist in the comfort of high-sec space where the struggles of capsuleer corporations have little effect. These essentially linear narrative arcs follow the structure of a traditional RPG: the player character completes quests, gets more powerful equipment, and becomes stronger *within a certain character model*. In many role-playing games, the character's gradual empowerment occurs by the strengthening of ostensibly intrinsic traits (new skills or enhanced attributes), which make them a purer articulation of their character class---a more powerful wizard, for example, will know more spells or increase the general strength of his magical abilities. *EVE* differs from the traditional RPG, however, in that the character identity the player chooses at the beginning does not determine the mold by which the player proceeds. The only way that the character becomes a more powerful iteration of its class is by purchasing more powerful equipment or earning that equipment through CCP-authored NPC quests. In the absence of reified and restrictive character classes, consumer identification is the only way CCP pigeonholes its capsuleers. Moreover, the implicit identification of characters by their users' purchasing decisions is reinforced by CCP's written material. The freedom that is *EVE*'s main selling point is articulated in terms that only come into being as a result of consumer choices: the main *EVE* website emphasizes a "What is your persona?" character-creation quiz in which they emphasize the character personae reified by purchasable objects, and elsewhere they refer to that same range of personae. CCP renders player persona as an object constructed by the aggregate of purchasing decisions, and their contributions to the discussion of player identity are rendered in terms of this consumerist framework. 

In contrast with the consumerist, materialist conception of player identity reinforced by the written material from CCP, capsuleer journalism conceives of player identity as a semiotic, narrative construction of character in relation to the diegetic game world. For capsuleer journalism, the player identity is reified only insofar as it interacts with the "lore" that acts as a backdrop to player and community activity in *EVE*. Here again the way that *EVE* differs from other RPGs and even other MMORPGs is crucial in understanding the way the community works. In many games, lore is conceived as the history of the world prior to the timespan of the game. Lore is always anterior to player action, contextualizing that action in a larger body of history, zoology, and archaeology of the diegetic world. In *Dungeons & Dragons*, the pioneering tabletop RPG that largely defined the RPG genre, lore is used as an ability to identify the names and powers of items and monsters, which is expressed materially as the right to look up the statistics of an item or an NPC monster in the *Player's Handbook* (Heinsoo et al. 181). In *EVE*, lore is *both* the pre-capsuleer history of the universe *and* the sum of all notable player activities that have substantively changed the nature of the *EVE* universe since. Lore in *EVE* thus includes material written by the game designers at CCP, but it also includes records of in-game wars and events that have been recorded by capsuleer writers. CCP retroactively incorporated these events as they appeared in the *EVE* forums into the lore of the game by creating a Wikipedia-style platform for player contributions to the collected lore, making this inclusive conception of lore an official part of the game world. These contributions are almost always focused on large-scale events involving many players, but they are also frequently rendered from the perspective the contributing writer. Interactions with the material stratum of *EVE* are thus logged in the semiotic stratum as lore, becoming part of the narrative backdrop that contextualizes the private experience of every capsuleer. All of these contributions are logged in the forums, in personal blogs, and through the capsuleer press outlets. As one particularly reflective forum poster Velicitia put it, "We don't (yet) have the luxury of 'museums' or national landmarks---so we're stuck with the 'cave paintings', journals, and word of mouth to keep our history/story alive." To the capsuleer, character identity is a narrative construct at the intersection of experience in the diegetic universe and the narrative self-rendering that comes from participation in the semiotic sphere---whether by posting in the forum or writing accounts in the chronicles. The consumerist, material stratum becomes nothing but a set of attributes that influences the way that story goes. The game, then, becomes the participation in a larger semiotic system of identification and collaborative narrative-making. The semiotic transcends the material; the paratext becomes the text.

#The Hyperreal, the Public Sphere, and MMO as Utopian Space

The question of fictionality remains unaddressed, but it comes to the fore again in considering these semiotic constructions of identity. In most ways, character persona in *EVE* is no different than the personae assumed in all social spheres. The main difference is the absence of an unconstructed material substratum to which these significations refer, an absence that leads to popular disavowal of *EVE* and other game environments as spaces of real substance. But these objections presume a principle of deterministic material reality that is by no means stable, even outside virtual contexts. Identity that is necessarily bound to a determined physical reality is dismissed in Judith Butler's refutation of the "metaphysics of substance" in *Gender Trouble*, to take a well known example: she presents the pre-discursive *substance* to which attributes are ascribed as nothing but the performance of those attributes (*Gender Trouble* 26-33). In Butler's account, the real is unyoked from the material. Jean Baudrillard also puts pressure on the idea of an the origin that precedes simulation in his *Simulacra and Simulations*: "hyperreal" is his term for "the generation by models of a real without origin or reality," a space "sheltered...from any distinction between the real and imaginary" in which the reality is not the referent but the whole set of referring images (166-7). Principles of reality such as these, in which the real is no longer coextensive with and even related to the material, are necessary to account for a world in which virtuality replaces materiality. In the context of such reality principles, *EVE* journalism can be seen as operating on the level of the hyperreal to create a utopian political space, a space in which substantive change is possible by purely semiotic intervention. Capsuleer journalism thus extends communal world-creation in *EVE*, making the construction of a virtual utopia the end-product of the game.



Discussions of the reality of virtual space mark much of the scholarship on virtual worlds. Richard Page begins his essay "Leveling Up: Playerkilling as Ethical Self-Cultivation" with an overview of this dominant strand of the game studies conversation. He identifies the philosophical underpinning of this discussion as the problem of the transcendent and the imminent, which stems from Plato's allegory of the cave. He invokes David Hall and Roger Ames to define "strict transcendence": "A is transcendent with respect to B if the existence, meaning, or import of B cannot be fully accounted for without recourse to A, but the reverse is not true" (qtd. in Page 240). In Page's view, the Western conversation focuses on the reality of the imminent always with respect to the transcendent, whereas many Chinese gamers in the MMO *Zhengtu* appear to be operating by a more Confucian ontological framework in which a thing is defined by its relationship with its environment and other things, not by some transcendant corollary. For many Chinese players, *Zhengtu* is defined by its correspondence with state-encouraged neoliberalism and valuation of the individual according to capacity for self-improvement (Page 241, 246, 249-55). Though by no means exhaustive of the conversation, both views take the autonomy from a virtual world, either by defining it with respect to a preceding transcendent (and thus "actual") iteration of it or by contextualizing it in a larger ideological and ethical system in the "real" world.

*EVE* works according to a logic unaccounted for by either framework, and is best described by the terms of Baudrillard's "hyperreal." The idea of a transcendent, ideal form becomes problematic when applied to science-fictional universes, because the origin of the *EVE* universe is a combination of conflicting generic predecessors, a shared but mutable vision in the community, and a numerically rational universe. Darren Jorgenson argues for this last point in his essay, "The Numerical Verisimilitude of Science Fiction and *EVE-Online*." He traces the use in SF of "numerical verisimilitude," a replication in prose of the process by which physical reality is understood in numerical terms; rather than describing in prose how fast a ship or a missile is going in space, for example, the author will give the projectile's acceleration in meters per second squared to three significant digits. This effect enhances realism because it appeals to a rational, quantifiable model that describes both our physical universe and the one represented in the text. In *EVE*, Jorgensen argues, "the simulation of numerical calculations for scientific verisimilitude in sf has given way to a situation in which calculation is itself the content of the sf text. The immersive experience of *EVE* is the experience of numerical calculation" (145). This accurately describes the experience of the capsuleer in the diegetic space of *EVE*, and it is an excellent account of the interface between the capsuleer and the world of the game, the means by which the user is involved in the virtual space of the game world. It is crucial to note, though, as he does,[^11] that the numerical cognition effect relies on interaction with a hyperreal system. The other systems of simulation in *EVE* are similarly hyperreal in ways that highlight the impossibility of describing the world of *EVE* along the lines of the imminent and the transcendent. The models of ships that capsuleers use are cutups and amalgamations of SF predecessors mediated by *EVE*'s own creative direction; in referring to a whole host of ideas of the spaceship, these models take none as an ideal form. The origin comes into being only with the model, disallowing any idea of a transcendent form to which the model refers. Similarly, the communal development of capsuleer society exists in response to the material conditions under which it has arisen. Because these conditions are unique to the game (or at least to the genre), there is no entity with reference to which the society is understandable except itself. The hyperreality of the material stratum of *EVE* prevents any apprehension of it by an imminent/transcendent philosophical framework.

But there is another sense in which *EVE* relies on the hyperreal for its immersive effect, a sense that goes beyond the material stratum engineered by CCP and into the paratextual, semiotic space that is defined by capsuleer discourse and the journalism that influences it. The semiotic space makes constant references to political configurations and ownership of space that only exist the discursive constructions of them---the material elements go no further than visualization and the numerical depiction of a quantifiable universe. To Baudrillard, political parties are effectively unable to oppose each other regardless of their rhetorical posturing or actions as an organization. Because two opposing parties would conceal the real determination of material conditions by capital, they are two parts of an endlessly regenerative simulacrum of progress. Similarly, political affiliations in *EVE* may bear vague resemblance to political postures in the world outside, but they in fact refer to no material practices except voluntary adherence in the diegetic space to a semiotic construct. These parties refer only to a semiotic identification with the idea parties---as Baudrillard might put it in reference to "real" political parties, capsuleers simulate political structures to conceal that those structures bear no relation to a material reality. In this way, identification in *EVE* is a willful enactment of the hyperreal nature of political affiliation. The success of *EVE* as a virtual reality actually relies on foregrounding the hyperreality of political struggle.

The role of capsuleer journalism in this political reenactment is in constructing a public sphere out of which public authority can arise, in a peculiar inversion of the creation of the public sphere defined by Jürgen Habermas. The capsuleer presses arose in response to a set of conditions identical to those that marked the rise of Western journalism in general. According to Habermas in *The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere*, "traffic in news...developed alongside the traffic in commodities.... With the expansion of trade, merchants' market-oriented calculations required more frequent and more exact information about distant events" (16). This initial news infrastructure was organized by merchants for their own use and was a privileged good that helped those involved maintain dominance of the market. Just as IRC chats and forum conversations in *EVE* developed into journalism, this rudimentary series of what were essentially newsletters eventually gave way to more publicly available forms of news as those printing them saw a wider untapped market of non-merchants. What was commercial and newly public quickly became "public" only in the sense that it became in many cases a mouthpiece for state authority in the eighteenth century. The press was now a means by which the state disseminated information it wanted to circulate and restricted information it did not. In coopting the presses in the eighteenth century, state authority inadvertently created the "public sphere of civil society" as an entity that arose out of a conflict over the right to information (21-6). Habermas's account goes on, but this final step, in which the press becomes the mouthpiece of the state and in response the public distinguishes itself as an adversary to the ruling authority (26), is where capsuleer journalism in *EVE* distinguishes itself historically from previous forms of journalism. In a direct mapping of *EVE*'s social structure to Habermas's account of public civil society and public authority, CCP would have to be seen as public authority. But because the semiotic space of *EVE* exists outside of the material substratum that CCP is able to control, and because CCP's business model relies on their being as invisible and un-statelike an arbiter as possible, the story of journalism in *EVE* departs from the story of journalism at large. CCP-controlled press outlets do not become agents of company authority in the way that the press becomes an agent of state authority, and capsuleer journalism in *EVE* becomes a mouthpiece only for capsuleer-controlled political bodies—--as, for example, *The Mittani* is perceived as a mouthpiece for Goonswarm. Press outlets like *The Mittani* and others form part of the political pageantry that makes *EVE* a successful alternate reality; journalism has become part of the game in its willful replication of the interaction between the public sphere and political authority.

In its directing role in the construction of social and political virtual space, capsuleer journalism takes on an essentially utopian function. In the first place, as discussed above, the determination of the "physical" space of *EVE* is heavily influenced by capsuleer discourse, which is in turn constituted and influenced by capsuleer journalism. Since CCP's business model is essentially to imitate a perfectly benevolent state, journalism is able to have the influence on power and economy that it does in the essentially utopian of the state envisioned by the founders of the United States, mobilizing dissent in the material stratum by the dissemination of information to the people. But the real sense in which these journalists are forming the universe of *EVE* is in their contribution to the semiotic sphere. A purely hyperreal world, one that is only an arrangement of signifiers unbound by an immutable referent, is susceptible to discursive formation much more immediately and directly than the hyperreal of "actual" political discourse, which is held in place by controlled scarcity and plutocratic control of capital and property. Journalism becomes the total reality of politics, because political bodies come into influence by their discursive manifestation. Moreover, just as the hyperreal operates by a perpetual replication of models, so journalistic accounts of the activity of player corporations and coalitions perpetually reinscribes the structure of such organizations according to the discursively determined model. With an infinitely renewable stock of material and conquerable space,[^12] an endless capacity for this reproduction of the model is established, and the hyperreal is literalized. 



The promise of *EVE* is to allow for this endlessly renewable frontier. Political forms do not calcify because there can never be restrictive control of material goods, and so the political structure is always fragile, the opportunities for destruction and creation always renewing themselves. The sense in which *EVE* is utopian is the sense in which it is always finally a *game*: because total material control is impossible, enormous empowerment of the individual is possible without falling into the structures of domination that pure individualism leads to in non-game space. The capsuleer press becomes the means by which this unrestricted and unrestrictive individualism is woven into the fabric of the game. The *EVE* utopia is one in which every player is actually potentially representable by the whole, and in which the state's single aim is to empower the individual. If games can be called escapist, it is because of this perfect malleability of reality; the hyperreal in a gaming context thus makes the MMO a potentially utopian space.

[^a]: Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game

[^b]: *WoW*'s user base is on the decline---it lost 700,000 users in the spring of 2013 alone (Gaston).

[^c]: ISK is the main currency in *EVE*

[^1]: The learning curve for *EVE* is notorious, as is the level of commitment required to remain active.

[^1.1]: In Internet slang, "AFK" ("Away From Keyboard") has replaced "IRL" ("In Real Life"). This is a non-trivial distinction, in that it implicitly rejects the idea that things one does online or in virtual space are not part of "real life."

[^2]: For examples, see: Rob Cox's "A Virtual Bank with Real Woes (*New York Times* 14 June 2009); Brad Plumer's "The Economies of Video Games" (*Washington Post* 28 Sept. 2012); and Dave Thier's "EVE Online Player Loses a Spaceship Worth Approximately $9,000" (*Forbes* 9 July 2013). 

[^3]: This is a very rare occasion in which in-game currency can actually be transferred out of the game, which was facilitated specifically by CCP for the purpose. In general, money is not transferable out of game except through black markets, which stabilizes the economy and prevents the use of *EVE* as a conduit for criminal transfer of funds.

[^3.1]: This communicability is the basis of much of the mainstream fiction involving MMOs. See for example Neal Stephenson (especially *Reamde* and *Snow Crash*) and Jonathan Lethem's *Chronic City*.

[^3.2]: Henceforth any reference to political activity or the political function most likely refers to the political structures of the game unless otherwise specified.

[^4]: They use Google's AdSense and Disquis, both relatively low-maintenance ad systems used to quickly monetize writing on the internet.

[^6]: An in-game term for the equipment attached to a given ship. This could include weapons, repair modules, mining equipment, or innumerable other items.

[^8]: Non-Player Character. A general term used in MMOs to distinguish computer-controlled characters from player-characters.

[^11]: He introduces numerical verisimilitude in relation to Baudrillard, saying that in the hands of "theorists such as Paul Virilio and Jean Baudrillard...this effect [is] the actual content of science," and "truth is determined by technological, social and cultural conditions of reproduction" (134). In the rest of Jorgensen's argument, this mathematical universe is rendered as still fundamentally representative, thus corresponding to a framework of the transcendent and the imminent and not a framework of the hyperreal. But the reference to the system as described by Baudrillard invites a reading of it according to his terms.

[^12]: The increase of nullsec space has been the major project of many of CCP's most lauded expansions.