---
title: title
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
date: 17 Dec. 2013
...

Though perhaps not the best known MMORPG[^a] in the world at large, *EVE Online* is one of the most notorious within the online gaming community. It is probably also the best known science fiction title in the genre, which is dominated by fantasy virtual worlds like *World of Warcraft*. But as the age of *WoW* passes,[^b] *EVE* may come to define the genre as a whole to a greater extent: it has 500,000 users and counting despite the notorious learning curve, and its users are known for sticking around (Griffiths).

In *EVE*, players are known as "capsuleers," in reference to the capsules that allow them to travel from ship to ship. Capsuleers have human avatars, but almost all of their interactions occur through their space ships, which are dauntingly customizable and appear as countless models with different functions. Though there are early missions built into the game to help new capsuleers assimilate, there is no predetermined point to *EVE*, even less so than in other "sandbox" games. Capsuleers decide what sounds like the most fun---whether mining, trading, exploring uncharted space, or preying on other capsuleers for their loot---and gradually gather the equipment and connections they need to play as they want to. What makes *EVE* distinctive and gets it the most coverage in gaming and mainstream media is the prevalence of its player-run corporations and coalitions. These are groups that assemble mostly through forums and IRC chat interfaces, and their goals differ from group to group. Many of the corporations are just trying to make as much ISK[^c] as possible, through mining, trade, and control of star systems. Some coalitions form as pirate groups, robbing lone capsuleers of their hard-won ships and the goods they carry. Some, like the Goonswarm and its subsidiaries,[^d] formed in order to wreak as much havoc as possible before becoming just another part of the game. This freedom and the infinite multiplicity of playing styles have become the cruxes of *EVE*'s draw, and the universe becomes richer as these possibilities increase.

To define *EVE* only according to what happens between ships in the simulated depths of space, though, is to miss half of what defines the game: many forms of writing have emerged around *EVE* that expand the game's universe, and in particular a spontaneous capsuleer press corps has emerged, reporting on events in the game and the actions of the company that produces it. The many forms and media of writing include forum postings, fan-fiction, personal blogs, and other platforms for retelling in-game experiences. In the first section of this paper, I will examine these emerging forms of writing in relation to each other in order to isolate the capsuleer journalism that is so pervasive in the extended *EVE* community. Having identified and defined it, I will continue in the second section to consider the relationship between writing and action in virtual space, asking how this form of journalism influences the social structures that define the game and contribute to the construction of virtual space. Placing the ideas of the public sphere and the hyperreal in the context of online gaming and virtual realities, I will argue that capsuleer journalism has redefined *EVE* as a virtual simulation of utopia in which individual agency and political action are actually constitutive of material reality, transforming the game into a participatory world determined in large part by the sum of individual experiences rather than the actions only of those who hold material power.

#Forms of Writing in *EVE*

Many forms of writing have appeared as supplements to *EVE*, from fan-fiction in the forums to news sites reporting on in-game events, even to pieces in *Forbes* and *The Huffington Post*. These forms of writing differ in many senses, and determining genre can be difficult. Some sources are avowedly fictional, while others report on *EVE* only when its events affect the world beyond the game. Some are intelligible to the lay reader, while others are so jargon-heavy as to be intelligible only to the veteran capsuleer, or at any rate someone who has spent enough time trolling the forums. The three types of journalism that distinguish themselves in the world of *EVE* are defined by audience and effect: non-gamer, non-capsuleer journalism; gamer, non-capsuleer journalism; and capsuleer journalism. The first reports on events that in some way interact with the non-game world, usually through converted currency. The second reports on in-game events as essentially non-fictional, and appears to function as a portal for gamers who are interested in the game world but are unable or unwilling to enter it.[^1] The final form of journalism is distinctly by and for capsuleers, reporting on game events as non-fictional insofar as they are defined by the actions of the player.[^1.1] This final type of journalism, which will be the main focus of my inquiry, participates in and influences in-game politics and discourse, and as such its journalistic function mirrors non-*EVE* writing.

Considering the relatively few articles on *EVE* in this first type of journalism, non-gaming publications, it becomes clear that they generally require some converting portal between the world of *EVE* and the world beyond. In most cases, this portal is a literal conversion of currency. In a *Forbes* article from December 2013 marking the release of an *EVE* expansion about a month after the fact, Daniel Nye Griffiths begins by referencing "tens of thousands of dollars poured into beautiful battleships which are then reduced to scrap" and a Ponzi scheme that notoriously robbed investors of the equivalent of $20,000 USD. His is a common example: tales of financial loss make a majority of non-gamer reporting on *EVE* events.[^2] A major counterexample was an in-game fundraiser for hurricane relief, which led to over $190,000 USD in donations.[^3] Not all examples of interaction between the in- and out-of-game worlds are financial, however. When Sean Smith, a State Department employee known in *EVE* as "Vile Rat," was killed in the attach on a U.S. Embassy in Bengazi, journalistic worlds collided. While notorious right-wing news reporter Glenn Beck was drawing dubious parallels between the CIA and the in-game guild Goonsquad (Beck) and other reporters were repeating Smith's communication to his *EVE* associates that he was unsure whether he would survive the night (Benedetti), capsuleer and non-capsuleer gamer-journalists were eulogizing Vile Rat for is in-game accomplishments, which were, according to those who admired him, legendary (Mittani, Totilo). What propelled the story (and *EVE*) into the mainstream and mainstream-gaming news outlets, though, was the relevance to non-game political events. Politics and finances are the two links between the world of capsuleers and the mainstream media.

The general gaming media tends to report on such events of financial and political import (usually with a different angle), but they also cover the largest events within the game and occasionally offer strategic columns for a general (or newbie) *EVE* audience. Sites like *Kotaku* (of the *Gawker* empire) and *Joystiq*'s MMO section, *Massively* (with the exception of the regular column "Eve Evolved"), are likely to approach *EVE* from the perspective of consumer journalism, reviewing expansions and covering the business of the game's creator, CCP. Exceptions are columns like "Eve Evolved," which writes about in-game concerns and occasionally in-game events, but with a mostly jargon-free, accessible style. Sites such as these tend to post videos and GIFs that are valuable to the non-capsuleer for their simple shock-and-awe value as well as their glimpse of the larger universe (of which they are likely not a part if they are reading these general accounts). 

These types of *EVE*-related journalism bear almost no similarity but the most basic to capsuleer journalism, which is inaccessibly laden with jargon and constitutes what Mia Consalvo calls "paratexts" of gaming (qtd in Page 247); though occurring outside of the game's chat interface, this form of writing is a type of in-game political discourse and definitional of the game space itself. [someexamplesofwriting] When I went on the forums to ask more experienced capsuleers what sites they like to use, I was quickly presented with controversy that stemmed from the essentially political nature of in-game reporting. Two responses referred to one of the major *EVE* news sites, themitanni.com, in terms hostile to its perceived bias. One user chastised another user's recommendation of the site, saying, "Also known as Goons News Network where every pubbie click helps to support it," while a second user recommended the site with the caveat: "if I desperately want to read Goonswarm-biased EVE news. (I don't)[.]" The context of this controversy bears explanation, as it is inherently related to the role of paratextual discourse in the *EVE* community. In [year x], a group of users who had organized on the notoriously-trolly *Somethingawful.com* entered *EVE* en masse in order to "break" it with practices that would make it less fun for everyone. They formed a group called "Goonswarm," but far from breaking the game, they ended up being a powerful force within it that still operates to this day---Sean Smith, or "Vile Rat" of the Bengazi attack, was a high-ranking member in the group, and the strength of the community outpouring commemorating his actions in *EVE* bears testament to the extent to which Goonswarm has become a defining part of *EVE*. The reason that Goonswarm is such an interesting case study is that their presence originated, expanded, and operates as much in the discursive, paratextual elements of *EVE* as in the ludic mainline of the universe. The pejorative "forum warriors" is often used to distinguish them as players whose activity on the forums is seen as more influential than their activity in nullsec, or the "null-security" space where battles occur. This characterization, as well as their point of origin being yet another forum, shows the extent to which written discourse is a binding agent of one of the most influential communities in *EVE*. The Mittani, the news outlet that is allegedly biased in the Goonswarm's favor and is named after a famous eponymous Goon, brings both political capital to the group (insofar as the evaluation of its bias is valid) and financial capital to the sites owners (who are in the Goonswarm).[^4] Extra-game discourse has served an important organizational function for the group, but it has also been used as a way to establish presence and influence in a universe that is mostly social.

#CCP and Capsuleers, the Material and the Semiotic

"Mostly" is an important qualifier to "social," though, and it is important not to lose sight of the limitations of paratext in the world of *EVE*; though almost any action in *EVE* requires enormous coordination and organization in order to be carried out, the medium through which those actions occur is programmatically determined. There is a daunting but still finite number of actions possible in what Alex Galloway has referred to in another gaming context as the "diegetic space" of the game, the space where ships blow each other up and planets float into view (Galloway citation). Without that diegetic space, the game becomes less a game than a collective fantasy. Insofar as visual representation can be a material basis, the entire material basis of the game is restricted by the things one is able to do. The criticism of the Goonswarm as "forum warriors" actually refers to a stratum deeper than the purely behavioral or ability-based, which is where a claim that Goonswarm is all talk would land. The criticism refers to a distinction between the material and the immaterial, suggesting that the Goonswarm is not participating in the true "political" struggles of in-game property and currency circulation so much as an extra-material and thus exploitative means of gain. In a sense, it is saying that anything they have won is ill-gotten, because it comes from outside the diegetic space of the game, thus establishing this diegetic space as a source of authoritative political determination. In making or reinforcing this divide, Goonswarm's critics enforce an in-game cultural distinction between the semiotic and the material.

To theorize the distinction between the semiotic and diegetic space of the world, it will be necessary to introduce CCP, the company that produces *EVE*; as the programmers of the diegetic space, CCP is the sole arbiter of materiality and material possibility in the *EVE* world. CCP, which stands for Crowd-Control Productions, **[brief history of company]**. 

CCP's control over the materiality of *EVE* takes two forms. The first is a determination of possibility in a "physical" sense: this includes the interface,[^5] physical laws of the universe, and the material goods that are available and usable in the game.**[make sure no mods are allowed]** Thus while the seemingly infinite customizability of *EVE* is one of its main points of attraction, the choices are restricted in the same way that consumer goods are restricted by commodity production. CCP determines the range of commodities available to capsuleers, and could theoretically place limits on the total number of ships, fittings,[^6] and other available points of contact between the user and the diegetic world. Presumably for reasons of functionality and preserving a somewhat level playing field, user mods are not supported, and thus the means by which capsuleers would alter material reality beyond the range permitted by CCP is disallowed. 

The second way that CCP determines the material reality of their universe is by determining the underlying economic and political infrastructure that dictate operations in *EVE*. The economic system is made up of three currencies, Isk, PLEX, and Aurum; the first is only able to be earned in-game, and the other two can be purchased with non-*EVE* currencies and exchanged for Isk on the market. In the political spectrum, the capsuleer government and all non-player corporations (which dictate much of the activity in high-security space and some in low-security space) are managed by CCP. **[something about the infrastructure used by player corps, maybe about corporate "ownership" of systems and property; this will take some research]** The social and semiotic elements of the game world are built by capsuleer activity in the diegetic space and the forums, but CCP has final control over what of it can be translated into the material world of the game and how it is able to manifest. 

One of the major roles of capsuleer journalism is to mediate between the capsuleer-controlled semiotic space, in which discussions occur and alliances form, and the CCP-controlled, material, diegetic space, in which property and money circulate. Only CCP's frequently stated commitment to providing tools by which players can create their own universe rather than providing the universe in which they can play. This vision goes one step further than the traditional "sandbox" game, which only signifies a renunciation of linear storytelling in favor of a set of possible experiences that the player can discover. The way that CCP makes good on this goal is by providing conquerable space (and enabling the power struggles that inevitably result). But they have also been committed from the beginning of their company to letting capsuleer discourse guide their activity and engineering---extra-company input, actual intellectual labor from future capsuleers, even helped them develop the early structures of the game when they were a new company with very little funding and staff (McCormick cit). Listening to the goings-on in the forums and the feedback at the live conventions that CCP holds several times a year is a major part of the decision-making process in the engineering of expansions. Forum users frequently link to writing outside of the forums, and such conversations often begin or influence threads of discussion.[^7] Whether the writers are reporting on rumored or confirmed actions on the part of CCP, reporting on in-game events, or commenting on the workings of the game and its community, this writing influences the discussions that become market research and idea mines for the game designers at CCP. Additionally, because many of these sources of journalistic writing are more centralized, accessible, and widely known than an emerging thread on the forum (of which there are many every day), their influence on the wider discussion can potentially be much wider than any other discursive element of *EVE*. The semiotic space of *EVE* frequently influences the material space through communication with CCP, and journalism is a major determining factor of activity in the semiotic space.

This type of interaction between journalism and controlling influence in *EVE* mirrors the way that journalism in general mediates between the private and public spheres. Journalism in *EVE* arose in response to a set of conditions identical to those that marked the rise of the earliest forms of journalism. As Jürgen Habermas describes it in *The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere*, "traffic in news...developed alongside the traffic in commodities.... With the expansion of trade, merchants' market-oriented calculations required more frequent and more exact information about distant events" (16). This initial news infrastructure was organized by merchants for inside use, and was a privileged good that helped those involved maintain dominance of the market. But this rudimentary series of what were essentially newsletters eventually gave way to more publicly available forms of news as those printing them saw the wider untapped market that non-merchants represented. What was commercial and newly public quickly became "public" only in the sense that it became in many cases a mouthpiece for state authority in the eighteenth century. The press was now a means by which the state disseminated information it wanted to circulate and restricted information it did not. In coopting the presses in the eighteenth century, state authority inadvertently created the *public sphere of civil society* as an entity that arose out of a conflict over the right to information (21-4). Habermas's account goes on, but this final step, in which the press becomes the mouthpiece of the state and in response the public distinguishes itself as an adversary to the ruling authority (26), is where capsuleer journalism in *EVE* distinguishes itself historically from previous forms of journalism. In a rough mapping of the *EVE* social structure to Habermas's account of public civil society and public authority, CCP would have to be seen as public authority. But because the semiotic space of *EVE* exists outside of the material substratum that CCP is able to control, and because CCP's business model relies on their being as invisible and un-statelike an arbiter as possible, the story of journalism in *EVE* departs from the story of journalism at large. CCP-controlled press outlets do not become agents of company authority in the way that the press becomes an agent of state authority, and capsuleer journalism in *EVE* becomes a mouthpiece only for capsuleer-controlled political bodies—--as, for example, *The Mittani* is perceived as a mouthpiece for Goonswarm. Press outlets like *The Mittani* and others form part of the political pageantry that makes *EVE* a successful alternate reality; journalism has become part of the game in its willful replication of the interaction between the public sphere and political authority.

The one space where the capsuleer press does conflict with CCP and the CCP-controlled communication outlets is in the way that they present the construction of player identity, a difference that reinforces their situation in the material and semiotic portions of the *EVE* universe. For its part, CCP uses its missives to reinforce a consumerist construction of identity according to purchasing decisions. The CCP-authored player guides, though routinely urging the player to join capsuleer-based communities as a means of learning, generally correspond to the NPC[^8]-driven corporations, which exist in the twilight of high-sec space where the struggles of capsuleer corporations have little effect. These essentially linear corporation arcs follow the structure of a traditional RPG: the player character completes quests, gets more powerful equipment, and becomes stronger *within a certain character mold*. In many role-playing games, the character's gradual empowerment occurs by the strengthening of ostensibly intrinsic traits (new skills or enhanced attributes) which make them a purer articulation of their character class---a more powerful wizard, for example, will know more spells or increase the general strength of his magical abilities. *EVE* contrasts, however, in that the character class the player chooses at the beginning does not determine the mold by which that character proceeds. The only way that the character becomes a more powerful iteration of its class is by purchasing more powerful equipment, or earning that equipment through CCP-authored NPC quests. CCP's implicit identification of characters by their users' purchasing decisions is reinforced by the company's written material. The freedom that is *EVE*'s main selling point is articulated in terms of character classes that only come into being as a result of consumer choices: the main *EVE* website emphasizes a "What is your persona?" character-creation quiz in which they emphasize the character personae reified by purchasable objects, and elsewhere they refer to that same range of personae. CCP renders player persona as an object constructed by aggregate purchasing, and their contributions to the discourse of player character are rendered in terms of this consumerist (but traditionally RPG) conception of identity.[^9] 

In contrast to the consumerist, materialist conception of player identity reinforced by the written material from CCP, capsuleer journalism conceives of player identity as a semiotic, narrative construction of *character*. For capsuleer journalism, the player identity is reified only insofar as it interacts not with consumer objects, but the "lore" that acts as a backdrop to the possible set of player actions and community activities in *EVE*'s present tense. Here again the way that *EVE* differs from other RPGs and even other MMOs is crucial in understanding the way the community works. In many games, the "lore" is the history of the world prior to the timespan of the game. Lore is always anterior to player action, contextualizing that action in a larger body of "history," zoology, and archaeology of the diegetic world. In *Dungeons & Dragons*, the pioneering tabletop RPG that largely defined the RPG genre, lore is used as an ability to identify the names and powers of items and monsters, which can be translated as the right to look up the statistics of an item or NPC monster in the *Player's Handbook* (cit). In *EVE*, lore is *both* the history of the universe prior to the event that contextualizes the presence of capsuleers *and* the sum of all notable player activities that have substantively changed the nature of the *EVE* universe since. Lore in *EVE* thus includes material written by game designers at CCP, but it also includes records of in-game wars and events that have been recorded by capsuleer writers. CCP retroactively incorporated these events as they appeared in the *EVE* forums into the lore of the game by creating a Wikipedia-style platform for player contributions to the collected lore. These contributions are almost always focused on large-scale events involving many players, but they are also frequently focused on the identity of the contributing writer. Interactions with the material stratum of *EVE* are thus logged in the semiotic stratum as lore, becoming part of the narrative backdrop that contextualizes the private experience of every capsuleer. And all of these contributions are logged in the forums, in personal blogs, and through the capsuleer press outlets. As one particularly reflective forum poster Velicitia put it, "We don't (yet) have the luxury of 'museums' or national landmarks---so we're stuck with the 'cave paintings', journals, and word of mouth to keep our history/story alive." To the capsuleer, character identity is a narrative construct at the intersection of experience in the diegetic universe and the narrative self-rendering that comes from participation in the semiotic sphere---whether by posting in the forum or writing accounts in the chronicles. The consumerist, material stratum is nothing except a set of attributes that help determine the way that story goes. 

Capsuleer writing would appear to operate as an alternative to the restraints inherent in any constructed universe. It is the means by which the player reifies character identity in a framework that transcends the array of consumer choices pre-formulated by CCP. The conflict between the material and semiotic spheres of *EVE* are not just conflicts of text and paratext or company and consumer. The conflict at issue in these distinct but cooperative strata is between different conceptions of identity in virtual space.

#The Hyperreal and MMO as Utopian Space

The question of fictionality remains unaddressed, but it comes to the fore again in considering these semiotic constructions of identity. In most ways, character persona in *EVE* is no different than the personae assumed in all social spheres. The differences are the absence of an unconstructed material substratum to which these significations refer, an absence that leads to the disavowal of *EVE* and other game environments as spaces of real substance.[^10] But these objections presume a principle of deterministic material reality that is by no means stable even outside of the virtual. Identity that is necessarily bound to a determined physical reality was roundly dismissed in Judith Butler's refutation of the metaphysics of substance in *Gender Trouble*: she presents the pre-discursive *substance* that is supposed to have attributes as nothing but the performance of those attributes (*Gender Trouble* cit). In Butler's account, the real is unyoked from the material. Before Butler, in 1983, Jean Baudrillard was refuting the origin that precedes the simulation in his *Simulacra and Simulations*: his hyperreal is "the generation by models of a real without origin or reality," a space "sheltered...from any distinction between the real and imaginary" in which the reality is not the referent but the whole set of referring images (166-7). Principles of reality such as these, in which the real is no longer coextensive with the material, are necessary to account for a world in which the virtual and the [material] coexist. In the context of such reality principles, *EVE* journalism can be seen as operating on the level of the hyperreal to create a utopian political space in which substantive change is possible by semiotic intervention. Capsuleer journalism thus extends the world-creation aspect of *EVE*, making the construction of a virtual utopia the end-product of the game.

Discussions of the reality of virtual space mark much of the scholarship on virtual worlds. Richard Page begins his "Leveling Up: Playerkilling as Ethical Self-Cultivation" with an overview of this dominant strand of the conversation. He identifies the philosophical underpinning of this discussion as the problem of the transcendent and the imminent, which stems from Plato's allegory of the cave. He invokes David Hall and Roger Ames to define "strict transcendence" as: "A is transcendent with respect to B if the existence, meaning, or import of B cannot be fully accounted for without recourse to A, but the reverse is not true" (qtd in Page 240). In Page's view, the Western conversation focuses on the reality of the imminent always with respect to the transcendent, whereas many Chinese gamers in the game *Zhengtu* appear to be operating by a more Confucian ontological framework in which a thing is defined by its relationship with its environment and other things, not by some transcendant corollary. *Zhengtu* is for many Chinese players defined by its correspondence with state-encouraged neoliberalism and valuation of the individual according to capacity for self-improvement (Page 241, 246, 249-55). Though by no means exhaustive of the conversation, both views take from the virtual world its autonomy, either by defining it with respect to a preceding transcendent (and thus "actual") iteration of it or by contextualizing it in a larger ideological and ethical system in the "real" world. **[maybe more about why this doesn't adhere to the transcendent/imminent model]**

*EVE* works according to a logic unaccounted for by either framework, and is best described by the terms of Baudrillard's "hyperreal." The idea of a transcendent, ideal form becomes problematic when applied to science-fictional universes, because the origin of the *EVE* universe is a combination of conflicting generic predecessors, a shared vision in the community, and a numerically rational universe. Darren Jorgenson argues for this last point very in his essay, "The Numerical Verisimilitude of Science Fiction and *EVE-Online*." He traces the use in SF of "numerical verisimilitude," a replication in prose of the process by which physical reality is understood in numerical terms; rather than describing how fast a ship or a missile is going in space, for example, the author will give the projectile's acceleration in meters per second squared to three significant digits. This effect enhances realism because it appeals to a rational, quantifiable model that describes both our physical universe and the one represented in the text. In *EVE*, he argues, "the simulation of numerical calculations for scientific verisimilitude in sf has given way to a situation in which calculation is itself the content of the sf text. The immersive experience of *EVE* is the experience of numerical calculation" (145). This accurately describes the experience of the capsuleer in the diegetic space of *EVE*, and it is an excellent account of the interface between the capsuleer and the world of the game, the means by which the user is involved in the material space of the game world. It is crucial to note, as he does,[^11] that the numerical cognition effect relies on interaction with a hyperreal system. 

But there is another sense in which *EVE* relies on the hyperreal for its immersive effect, a sense that goes beyond the material stratum engineered by CCP and into the paratextual, semiotic space that is defined by capsuleer discourse and the journalism that influences it. This semiotic space makes constant references to political configurations and ownership of space that only exists as the discursive construction of it---the material elements go no further than visualization and the numerical universe. **[IN Baudrillard, politics is etc]** Political affiliations in *EVE* may bear vague resemblance to political postures in the world outside, but they in fact refer to no material practices except voluntary adherence in the diegetic space to a semiotic construct. These parties refer only to a semiotic identification with the party---as Baudrillard might put it in reference to "real" political parties, capsuleers simulate political structures to conceal that those structures bear no relation to material truth. In this way, identification in *EVE* is a willful enactment of the hyperreal nature of political affiliation. The success of *EVE* as a virtual reality actually relies on this foregrounded hyperreality of political struggle.

Because the reality of *EVE* is purely hyperreal, journalism takes on an essentially utopian function. In the first place, as discussed above, the determination of the "physical" space of *EVE* is heavily influenced by capsuleer discourse, which is in turn constituted and influenced by capsuleer journalism. Since CCP's business model is essentially to imitate a perfectly benevolent state, journalism as allowed to have the influence on power and economy that it does in the idealized vision of the state envisioned by the founders of the United States. But the real sense in which these journalists are forming the universe of *EVE* is in their contribution to the semiotic sphere. A purely hyperreal reality, one that is only an arrangement of signifiers unbound by an immutable referent (cit Baudr.), is susceptible to discursive formation much more immediately and directly than the hyperreal of "actual" political discourse, which is held in place by controlled scarcity and plutocratic control of capital and property. Journalism becomes the total reality of politics, because political bodies come into influence by their discursive manifestation---moreover, just as the hyperreal operates by a perpetual replication of models (cit), so journalistic accounts of the activity of player corporations and coalitions perpetually reinscribes the structure of such organizations according to the discursively determined model. With an infinitely renewable stock of material and conquerable space,[^12] an endless capacity for this reproduction of the model is established, and the hyperreal is literalized. The promise of *EVE* is to allow for this endlessly renewable frontier. Political forms do not calcify because there can never be restrictive control of material goods. The sense in which *EVE* is utopian is the sense in which it is always finally a *game*: because total material control is impossible, the dream of the perfectly empowered individual is possible without falling into the structures of domination that pure individualism leads to in non-game space. The capsuleer press, by which I mean the aggregate of all capsuleer journalism, becomes the means by which this unrestricted and unrestrictive individualism is woven into the fabric of the game. The *EVE* utopia is one in which every player is actually potentially representable by the whole and the state's single aim is to empower the individual. If games can be called escapist, it is because of this perfect malleability of reality; the hyperreal in a gaming context thus makes the MMO a potential utopia.

utopianism--subject as empowered against state authority--utopian MMO--possible because of the extent to which the MMO is pure hyperreal

[^a]: Massively etc.

[^b]: *WoW* marked its first net loss of users since its inception recently (cit)

[^c]: The main currency in *EVE*

[^d]: CFC, or Clusterfuck Coalition, is a particularly memorable example.

[^1]: The learning curve for *EVE* is notorious, as is the level of commitment required to remain active.

[^1.1]: [distinction between IRL and AFK]

[^2]: More examples in a footnote

[^3]: This is a very rare occasion in which in-game currency can actually be transferred out of the game, which was facilitated specifically by CCP for the purpose. In general, money is not transferable out of game except through black markets.

[^4]: They use Google's AdSense and Disquit, both relatively low-maintenance ad systems used to quickly monetize writing on the internet.

[^5]: Which is not true of all MMOs; within limits, WoW allows interface mods to be implanted by the user.

[^6]: an in-game term for etc.

[^7]: examples here?

[^8]: Non-Player Character. A general term used in MMOs to distinguish computer-controlled characters from player-characters.

[^9]: (get this in the body?) This too corresponds to a later development in Habermas's history of journalism: "Because private enterprises evoke in their customers the idea that in their consumption decisions they act in their capacity as citizens, the state has to 'address' its citizens like consumers" (195). CCP as a company seems to act like the state only insofar as the state acts like a company.

[^10]: Surely there are sources for this

[^11]: He introduces numerical verisimilitude in relation to Baudrillard, saying that in the hands of "theorists such as Paul Virilio and Jean Baudrillard...this effect [is] the actual content of science," and "truth is determined by technological, social and cultural conditions of reproduction" (134). In the rest of Jorgensen's argument, this mathematical universe is rendered as still fundamentally representative, thus corresponding to a framework of the transcendent and the imminent and not a framework of the hyperreal. But the acknowledgement that this 

[^12]: [point out that this is usually the focus of CCP interventions]