#Introduction: What is *EVE*?

Though perhaps not the best known MMORPG[^a] in the world at large, *EVE Online* is one of the most notorious in the online gaming community. It is probably, however, the best known science fiction title in the genre, which is dominated by fantasy virtual worlds like *World of Warcraft*. But as the age of *WoW* passes,[^b] *EVE* may come to define the genre as a whole: it has 500,000 users and counting despite the notorious learning curve, and its users are known for sticking around (Griffiths).

In *EVE*, players are known as "capsuleers" for the capsules that allow them to travel from ship to ship. Capsuleers have human avatars, but almost all of their interactions occur through their space ships, which are dauntingly customizable and appear as countless models with different functions. Though there are early missions built into the game to help new capsuleers assimilate, there is no predetermined point to *EVE*, even less so than in other "sandbox" games. Capsuleers decide what sounds like the most fun---whether mining, trading, exploring uncharted space, or fighting other capsuleers for loot---and gradually gather the equipment and connections they need to do it. What make *EVE* distinctive and gets it the most coverage in gaming and mainstream media are its player-run corporations and coalitions. These are groups that assemble mostly through the forums and chat interfaces, and their goals are unique to each one. Many of the corporations are just trying to make as much ISK[^c] as possible, through mining, trade, and control of star systems. Some coalitions form as pirate groups, robbing lone capsuleers of their hard-won ships, often-expensive and just as often insured, and the goods they carry to sell or use on their own. Some, like the Goonswarm and its subsidiaries,[^d] formed in order to wreak as much havoc as possible before becoming just another part of the game. This freedom and the infinite multiplicity of playing styles have become the crux of *EVE*'s draw, and the universe becomes richer as these possibilities increase.

To define *EVE* only according to what happens between ships in the simulated depths of space, though, is to miss half of what defines the game: many forms of writing have emerged around *EVE* that expand the universe of *EVE*, and in particular a spontaneous capsuleer press has emerged, reporting on events in the game and the actions of CCP, the company that produces it. The many forms and media of writing include forum postings, fan-fiction, personal blogs of commentary, and other platforms for retelling in-game experiences. In this paper, I will examine these emerging forms of writing in relation to each other in order to isolate the capsuleer journalism that is so pervasive in the extended *EVE* community. Having identified and defined it, I will consider the relationship between writing and action in virtual space, asking how this form of journalism influences the social structures that define the game and contribute to the construction of virtual space. Placing the ideas of the public sphere and the hyperreal in the context of online gaming and virtual realities, I will argue that capsuleer journalism has redefined *EVE* as a virtual simulation of utopia in which individual agency and political action are again constitutive of material reality, as a participatory world determined in large part by the sum of individual experiences rather than the actions only of those who hold material power.

[^a]: Massively etc.

[^b]: *WoW* marked its first net loss of users since its inception recently (cit)

[^c]: The main currency in *EVE*

[^d]: CFC, or Clusterfuck Coalition, is a particularly memorable example.