"Other things are "just" battlegrounds, and they're cleaned up ... I
mean, yeah, Asakai was a "big fight" as was the interdiction of Yulai
... but so was the Battle of the Bulge or the destruction of the Bismark
... but you don't see random plaques in the middle of the Ardennes or
the Atlantic Ocean. Big battles are remembered in museums and in small
corners of national landmarks (e.g. there's a hole in the stonework of
the RAF Chapel at Westminster where a German bomb broke it during the
Battle of Britain... but didn't explode).

Then there are other things of note that happen which don't occur at
battlegrounds -> GHSC infiltrating Ubiqua Seraph, disbanding of BoB,
etc...

We don't (yet) have the luxury of "museums" or national landmarks -- so
we're stuck with the "cave paintings", journals, and word of mouth to
keep our history/story alive (not to mention "Eve: Source" and the other
books that CCP is teasing us with). Perhaps WiS, Jessica (CCP's trailer
maker thing), and some creative log trolling will allow CCP to recreate
these "historic events" for people to watch in a museum in
stations."^[Velicitia, 



Fragment:
The hyperreal as applied to virtual reality resolves the imminent/transcendent problem in the following way: in the production of the imminent, the absent transcendent is also simultaneously produced. The ideal form of the spaceship did not exist until the spaceship was represented, perhaps as a hot-air balloon that can make lunar voyages or a flying saucer. The transcendent spaceship becomes the sum of all the imminent representations that posit a different ideal form. 




"The root of this issue is that CCP has an obsession with trying to make
the game mechanics justified with regards to the lore – and not just
some, but ALL of them."^[Scarlet, Svetlana. "I Don't Want to Be a
Demigod." *The Mittani*, 16 Oct. 2013] " So, all capsuleers are
psychopaths and megalomaniacs that are increasingly eroding the powers
of entrenched authorities.

The problem with this particular trope is that if that's the case, why
do the established authorities bother putting up with them? Why do they
create more of them? Capsuleers are only “immortal” in the same way that
a scuba diver can “breathe underwater” or an airplane pilot can “fly.”
CCP tells us that the NPC empires are helpless to do anything against
capsuleers, except that 95% of these psychopaths have clones in NPC
stations and almost all commerce in Eve takes place at market hubs in
NPC space. NPCs still have control of most stargates, and CONCORD can
destroy capsuleer's ship at will. If NPCs were really worried about the
powers of capsuleers, they could clean them out of empire space in a
hurry, and then (if past experience is anything to go by) just let the
nullsec alliances bludgeon themselves to death."^[ibid.]

Section titled "Don't Tell Me Who I Am" ^[ibid.] Scarlet objecting to
the picture of capsuleers as bloodthirsty etc. Tension when CCP tries to
define player characters and therefore players... Pushing back against
the mold

From "SERAPH IX BASARAB: MIGHT BE A LONG WAR," author seraph ix basarab on evenews24.com/2013/12/08/seraph-ix-basarab-might-be-a-long-war/

"The CFC’s presence has kept an air of fear over the battlefield ensuring
N3 doesn’t escalate completely in any of the battles but if that is
enough to give “DTF” the winning advantage is debatable. N3 simply needs
to hold onto what it already has. Any gains are a plus. N3 also has a
large propaganda advantage. The narrative of “fighting the evil Goons
and their pets” holds the attention more than what any of the other
sides can feed their pilots from “honorable third party” mantra to “take
back our Drone regions."

Note the extent to which a slogan can determine a battle and in-game political landscape; influence of discourse on virtual space

"And it isn’t out of any idealism that I hold that opinion. N3, CFC, DTF, they’re really no better than one another. Those who hold themselves as morally superior, especially in a video game, are delusional. It’s just role playing." ibid. lol Baudrillard


McCormick, Rich. “The Making of EVE Online.” PC Gamer. N. p., n.d. Web. 13 Dec. 2013.


"He wasn’t alone. Even though the team put themselves through sleepless nights and cashless days in the name of EVE, Reynir maintains his shock that people cared about the game. “That surprised me: the level of passion for the game right from the get go.” Forums and IRC groups sprung up to discuss the impending title. “Before release you just had to say one sentence and everyone got it. People had such a keen idea of what the game would be, they were able to fill in the gaps.” Those players involved in the beta stuck their tendrils further into the universe than even the developers could manage. The fans started to understand EVE better than the creators." 2

note that the CCP-fanbase feedback loop exists from the inception. A different kind of crowdfunding

"CCP’s resident economist – Dr Eyjólfur Guðmundsson – sees the arrival of the Goonswarm alliance from somethingawful.com’s forum as one of the biggest surprises. Traditionally deployed into an MMO to break the game, the Goons used EVE’s loose boundaries to develop new combat techniques. “I remember when they came in and started to attack large capital ships with swarms of low-level players. It was ingenious, and it showed us that the fundamental design of EVE was still functional.” The Goons’ rise to a kind of chaotic power was a late-stage proof of concept, showing the rules of the universe hadn’t crystallised around a set way to play." 3

explains the goon thing, but also interesting that one major platform is communicating with another

"This fame comes with a price. In June 2006, a CCP employee used their position to obtain a set of blueprints that constituted an unfair advantage for their chosen alliance. Reynir recounts the experience as one of CCP’s biggest mistakes to date. “It was such a minor thing, but the rule is, do not cheat. Players were super-concerned because we did not fire him on the spot, and that was probably a mistake in hindsight.” EVE’s utterly balanced economy – where everything is mined, manufactured and sold by the players – means that injecting outside sources into the production stream has repercussions potentially universe-wide."

cf the Zhengdu magic circle thing


“‘EVE Online’ Crosses The Rubicon: CCP Games’ David Reid Talks Galactic Free Markets.” Forbes. N. p., n.d. Web. 13 Dec. 2013.

"One of the earliest moments of emerging gameplay in EVE was in the first six months – what we call the Russian-Scandinavian War.

The idea of EVE when we built it was that you had High Security, Low Security and Null Security. Null Security had computer-controlled pirates, which were stronger than any individual player. So, the idea is that players would spend a year or so in High-Sec, would build up resources and would then go out and push the pirates out of Null-Sec.

Of course, what happened was that on day one everybody went to Null-Sec, and tried to kill the pirates, but couldn’t. And since this was 2003, and we had a very different Internet, a lot of the corporations ended up being geographically based. I would go to my friend or neighbor and ask him to play EVE with me, rather than finding a group on the Internet.

As a result, clusters of systems in the universe were governed by particular nationalities. There was a heavy concentration of Russians on the right-hand side of the universe, and they were alongside a Scandinavian group of players, who had a group of French and Benelux players on their left, and a group of Americans up at the top of the map.

We didn’t launch the game with Russian localization, and we didn’t have Unicode support (i.e. for cyrillic lettering), but a group of industrious Russians worked out how to hack the client and were able to communicate among themselves. The problem was that when they tried to communicate with someone else, it just came up as triangles, gibberish and ASCII code.

As a result, a lot of their communications with other groups led to war – and that’s how the Russian-Scandinavian war began."


Arcturus, Wilhelm. “Something About People Who Buy Ink by the Barrel.” The Ancient Gaming Noob. 24 Sept. 2012. Web. 13 Dec. 2013.

"I think we need a new saying, something equivalent to the Mark Twain quote about never getting in an argument with somebody who buys ink by the barrel and paper by the ton, to cover the modern world.  In Twain’s day, the editor of a newspaper wielded a lot of power by his ability to get his words printed and out to people in a way that no other method could match.  In EVE, taking on an articulate, motivated, and forum focused community has similar issues."
