---
title: "History is the True Natural History of Man"
date: December 5, 2014
---

Species is back on the table for discussion. The human species especially is in the middle of a long intellectual reworking---whether as a result of what Ursula K. Heise calls ecocriticism's "critical reconceptualization of modernist notions of human psychological identity and political subjecthood" or Donna Haraway's self-described cyborg "blasphemy," which in 1991 was already after the point at which "the boundary between human and animal [had been] thoroughly breached" (Heise 506, Haraway **cite1, cite2**). The science of species is not being doubted per se, though the scientism of invoking species at all may often be. It is more that species has failed as a humanist heuristic because of everything it brings with it: it has been on one hand too universalizing, and on the other too enmeshed in a history of racist supremecisms. 

Just as the term has gone understandably out of fashion, though, problems arise that need the human to be considered as a species if they are to be addressed. Critiques of anthropocentrism and declarations of the Anthropocene need (and have developed) more than a common-sense understanding of the human-as-species to proceed. In Dipesh Chakrabarty's influential essay "The Climate of History: Four Theses," for example, the human as a species becomes both thinkable and necessary to encapsulate the human imaginary "scale[d] up" to the level of a geological force, which is what is required to think the "human" as a species in the age of climate change and the Anthropocene. Despite this necessity, rethinking the human in these terms causes some epistemological and historigraphic problems. Chief among them are "the collapse of the age-old humanist distinction between natural history and human history" and the need "to bring together intellectual formations that are somewhat in tension with each other: the planetary and the global; deep and recorded histories; species thinking and critiques of capital" (201, 213). In other words, this is neither the common-sense nor the technical definition of species. This is a new "species," a "species" that "may indeed be the name of a placeholder for an emergent, new universal history of humans that flashes up in the moment of the danger that is climate change"---that is, a new universal history inaugurated perhaps with his own essay of 2009, and certainly (by his own timeline) no earlier than 1990 (198-9, 221). The reconsidered species concept arises because the human has transcended its conceptual boundaries. Or perhaps it arises because the human species has *broken* the species concept more broadly writ. Any way you like it, "species"---in the oldest echelon of the categories of the furthest-reaching historical temporality, "deep history" (Chakrabarty 212)---has again somehow become new.

Chakrabarty's is not the only recent revisitation of the human and the species, and for an essay on the human and the concept of species in general it would be a strange place to begin. Starting here, though, where the human transcends the conceptual parameters of the species and demands a reworking of the category itself, lets me approach a concept in Marx's *Economic & Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844* in a new light: the human as "species-being." Chakrabarty himself draws attention to Marxian species-being in a footnote, but in context its relevance is restricted to a modest definition of the concept---"collective self-recognition as species" (215, n.48).^[Many other treatments of the concept take a similar bent: (examples here)] The implicit contention of this essay will be that this is a more useful concept in rethinking species than it appears, and that the subtleties of its definition can help resolve the tension between nature and culture, natural history and history, and, as Chakrabarty calls for, between "species thinking and critiques of capital" (213). 

These overwhelming tensions will be provoked before they are resolved, though, by Marx's statement from which the present essay takes its title: "History is the true natural history of man" (391). 

I will build to a direct reading of this difficult statement, and my ultimate goal will be to do so both with sensitivity to the context in the larger work and with an eye to the present crisis of *defining* species. To get to this reading, though, I will first bring together the many disparate passages throughout the *Manuscripts* in which the topic itself and those that go into it are discussed, thereby attempting to systematize parts of an early, somewhat marginal work never meant for publication (**cite**).^[one of the many quotes available regarding the non-systematic nature of early marx; these exist yeah?] This will lead me, in the second section, to a discussion of how material nature and its altered form in industry and technology constitute a prosthesis to the human essence, forming a concept of essence that is non-deterministic, mutable, and historically contingent. When I do arrive at the statement itelf, I will argue that it has to be understood as a process of revolution in the human species along with the means and scale of production, meaning that in a very material sense species-being is subject to historical change*. The understanding of the new "universal" concept of the human-as-species in this early treatise from Marx, in addition to responding to some of the basic tensions Chakrabarty points out, can contribute to the rethinking of the human as a planetary (as well as global) force.

First, though, it will be necessary to say what "species-being" is, and where it comes from. 

#Species-Being in General

Species-being is originally developed in Feuerbach's *The Essence of Christianity* as the individual human's recognition of the self in terms of the human species. [more about F.] 

In Marx's *Manuscripts*, though, species-being becomes a means of elaborating the extent of the alienation inherent in labor. To the human as species-being, production is a "life activity," which is Marx's term for an essence-defining activity: the "whole character of species, its species-character, resides in the nature of its life activity." For the human, this life activity is equated with "labour" or "productive life itself," also referred to as "life-producing life" (328). As Marx acknowledges, though, "animals also produce"; it is not life-producing life itself, but *conscious* productive life that "distinguishes [the hu]man from animal life activity" (328-9). This consciousness in turn is evidence and product of the human assumption of "the species as its own essential being or itself as a species-being" (329). Not only conscious consideration of self as species, but also conscious production on the scale of species---or to put it in more Hegelian terms, the recognition of the self in the species as object of labor---defines the human as a species-being. 

Much of the concept to this point is a direct development of Feuerbach with a redirected emphasis on labor [^yeah i definitely need to confirm this]. Marx's development of the point comes, explicitly and implicitly, when he discusses the effects of alienation on the species-life of the human. In the first place, through the loss of freedom concomitant with estranged labor, he addss *freedom* to consciousness of self-as-species as a condition of human species-being. The productive life-activity so essential to the human becomes, in alienated labor, "*external* to the worker, i.e. does not belong to his essential being" (326). Through the loss of this productive essence, the worker's activity ceases to be "his own spontaneous activity." It instead "belongs to another, it is a loss of [the worker's] self" (327). Losing the object of labor means that freedom of action, freedom in any but the most "animal functions," is also lost. Species-being ceases to be possible when the conscious productive activity, life-producing life, is disrupted by estrangement of labor, and this is so primarily because of the loss of freedom that estrangement entails. 

Including free, "spontaneous" production in the definition of species-being is no small extension of the concept, but from a philosophical standpoint, even it is not the most notable. Pursuing the Hegelian line of reasoning that Marx is extending, one has to consider the freedom of spontaneous production as also the freedom to define self in a way that is dependent on conscious alteration of "nature," here meaning some external or "sensuous" matter. It might be more accurate to say this is a "quasi-Hegelian" line of reasoning, because Marx's alteration of work and the transformation of nature disrupts the "fictive temporality"[cite? butler?] of Hegel's *Phenomenology of Spirit*. For Hegel, the bondsman defines himself through working on "the thing" and recognizing himself in that work; in a prophetic gesture, we are told that this self-recognition will lead to emancipation.[^yeah definitely need to confirm here, or rather find the evidence in Hegel; don't just footnote "bruce" and leave it. at least a few sentences of evidence] But self-recognition through work "on the thing" only happens after the struggle with and subjugation to the lord. [ again maye some evidence hm? since this is now the first section rather than introduction] In Marx, the self defined by productive activity and transformation of nature is *a pre-alienation state that is lost through subjugation*. Divergence from Hegel's temporality may seem like a quibble, but it is both a serious revision of the status of work in Hegel's system and potentially a difference with the status of work in portions of Marx's later writing. If self-definition already includes "work on the thing" prior to the struggle with the lord, the bondsman is belatedly discovering a fundamental aspect of human species-being rather than developing capacity for self-recognition as a result of struggle. In fact, it may simply be more accurate to point out that the text's general silence on the lord and bondsman paradigm itself---despite its liberal use of the fruits of the struggle, subjugation, and eventual transcendence---re-essentializes some of what is, in Hegel, quite contingent on the outcome of struggle.

Though some of what is contingent on struggle and subjugation in the Hegelian tale is, *contra* Hegel, essentialized by Marx, struggle still remains as the vehicle of alienation. Overcoming alienation and regaining species-being is the outcome of the bondsman's subjugation---though when it is regained, that species-being has changed character somewhat according to material conditions that have changed across historical epochs. Understanding that there is a pre-alienation species-being and a post-alienation species-being resolves an apparent contradiction in the temporality of species being, the question of when it arises and what happens when it has been lost. Near the end of the third manuscript, for example, Marx writes of Hegel: 

> In short, he sees labour---within abstraction---as man's *act of self-creation* and man's relation to himself as an alien being and the manifestation of himself as an alien being as the emergence of *species-consciousness* and *species-life*. (395)

To jump to this passage from the previous ones is to skip much, and much of what happens in between will be the topic of the following sections. In the interim, though, it has become clear that the alienation through labor has been (following Hegel) internalized, hence the transition from the loss of freedom to the self as an "alien being." This internalization is itself presented as a kind of regaining of the lost object of labor [cite plz; actually having a tough time here without more on the stuff in the middle; how does the regaining of the alienated self occur?]; the connection between the "act of self-creation" and the "emergence of species-consciousness and species-life" is one of causality, in that the act of self-creation is contingent on his alienation from himself. How can it be that the individual's self-creation through Hegelian labor can also be the emergence of species-life? The consideration of the self as species, or in other words the equation of the two that is inherent in the term itself, has been established, but the reality and materiality of what that means becomes, at this point, a different type of thing. If the species-being through productive life-activity is a pre-alienation state, but alienation is *also* presented in the third manuscript as something arising out of internalized alienation, there must be two species-beings: the originary version that is lost through alienation, and the secondary version that is regained when alienation is transcended. Species-being is an essence, that much is clear---but if it is regained in a form somewhat distinct from that which it had in the first place, how mutable and contingent an essence is it?

To answer this, I will need to turn to *things*---to ask how external or "sensuous" nature becomes definitional of the human essence.

#Object, Nature, Prosthesis

Near the end of the first manuscript, at the conclusion of the extended engagement with species-being, Marx says, "man's estrangement from the product of his labour, his life activity, his species-being, is the *estrangement of man from man*," which "means that each man is estranged from the others and that all are estranged from man's essence" and that "each man therefore regards the other in accordance with the standard and the situation in which he as a worker finds himself" (330). Many times throughout the *Manuscripts*, the social and the species are equated,[^see baffled marginalia somewhere] and here the logic of that equation begins to be revealed. In the system that is beginning to be developed even here in 1844, social relations mediated through labor give rise to the division of labor, an ossified and industrialized version of social relations. But in this first stage of the division of labor we see that the consideration of others in terms of working conditions comes about only as a result of estrangement of (1) each individual from the self and (2) each individual from each other. Famously, and for my purposes very significantly, this can be understood as one manifestation of the social relationship replacing another, anterior one. Both are manifestations of species-being: the first, originary social relationship is the pre-alienation form of species-being, and the second, industrial one, the species-being regained through internalization. 

This will not be an easy substitution, however. If division of labor is able to replace the more basic social relationship and, thus, species-being, the resulting version of species itself will necessarily be conditioned by *things*, by the *product* and the *means of production*. Commodity fetishism is based on social labor---social labor mediated by division of labor---inhering in the natural form of the object; to say that social relationships are objectified in the commodity is therefore also to say that the species is objectified in the commodity. At the same time, the means of production are themselves undergoing constant revolution, and with the revolution of the means of production, so the productive activity or species-character of the human must accordingly develop. 

To reiterate and simplify: the species is objectified in the product, and revolutionized with the means of production. It begins to become clear how history could be "the true natural history of man" by simply considering these statements in a historical-materialist paradigm, but a direct treatment of the statemtn will have to be deferred until the relationship of *thing* to *species* can be clarified.

Two questions will therefore motivate what follows. First: What does it mean for a *thing* to be the objectification of the human species-character? And second: How is the human species a thinkable concept if it is changing along with the tools it adopts? ---And, implicit in or as an addendum to the latter: What is the basis for saying that it *does* change along with the tools it adopts?

The beginning of the answer to the first question is buried in Marx's version of objectivity. After very closely paraphrasing Hegel's eight points on "the *surmounting of the object of consciousness*," Marx reminds us of the internalization of the object before paying very careful attention to the second point: i.e., "That it is the alienation of self-consciousness which establishes thingness [*Dingheit*]" (387-8). In what follows, he subverts the Hegelian statement from within. The "thingness" of Hegel is immaterial and reflective: 

> it is…clear that a *self-consciousness*, through its alienation, can only establish *thingness*, i.e. an abstract thing, a thing of abstraction and not a *real* thing. It is also clear that thingness is therefore in no way something *independent* or *substantial vis-à-vis* self-consciousness; it is a mere creature, a *postulate* of self-consciousness. And what is postulated, instead of confirming itself, is only a confirmation of the act of postulating….(389)

Surmounting the object of consciousness in Hegel's eyes is, to Marx, not the creation of a thing, but the creation of thing*ness*, an "abstraction" that exists as a structure of pure thought and as an artefact of self-alienation. Marx forcefully counters by reasserting a distinction between the abstract self-consciousness and the "real, corporeal *man*, his feet firmly planted on the solid earth and breathing all the powers of nature" (389). This is the same person as the person of Hegel's self-consciousness; Marx's concept does not strictly conflict with Hegel's in the sense of being unable to coexist with it. The distinction that Marx eventually makes is, on one hand, between the "thingness" established by the abstract surmounting of the object and the "*real* thing" that is the object of the "*objective* essential powers." Through interaction with "*real* thing[s]," the corporeal human establishes itself as "fundamentally *nature*," and this naturalism in turn defines the "objectivity" that is "an inherent part of [human] essential nature" (389). The subject of alienation is this essential "objectivity," the essential powers of material production. Objectivity, in Marx's sense, is not the production of real things itself, but rather the confirmed ability to change the environment and to act as a natural being---not the "corporeal" action itself but the experience of that action externalized. 

At the same time, however, this experience-of-production, or *objectivity*, has a pre- and post-alienation state, just like the rest of species-being. In the first manuscript, the "fashioning of the objective" is part of the human species alone: in contradistinction to other animal species, human production has a *standard* of production, a conscious schema determining material interaction: 

> "Animals produce only according to the standards and needs of the species to which they belong, while man is capable of production according to the standards of every species and of applying to each object its inherent standard; hence man also produces in accordance with the laws of beauty" (329). 

The sense in which species-being is defined as self-consideration in terms of the species, i.e. the concept as Feuerbach establishes it, comes into contact with the experience of essential, material production through the *production standard mediated by species-consciousness*. Hegel's abstract self-consciousness, the pure *I* that has withdrawn itself from nature, re-enters species being in Marx's paradigm through conscious engagement with material nature. The dual-nature of species-being established here allows the material or "natural" human to exist within the Hegelian paradigm of self-consciousness.

This dual-nature of the human is important for our purposes insofar as it permits a human understanding of self in species-being that is capacious, extending beyond the limits of the individual and even beyond the limits of *all* individual humans. This expanded understanding of species is not just a product or reflection of self-consciousness, the abstract subject. It is an understanding realized in the material extension of the human into nature through the creation of objects. This object-oriented species concept invites a reading of the corporeal extension of the human through technology as essence mediated through prosthesis.

Man is part of nature; nature is part of man: these are not equivalent statements, and Marx makes both. In the first case: "To say that man's physical and mental life is linked to nature simply means that nature is linked to itself, for man is a part of nature" (328). To include human alteration of the "natural" as "part of nature" is to reject the nature/culture distinction wholesale while still analyzing the interaction between the human and non-human nature. The analysis of human species-being therefore remains, in Marx's view, an analysis of nature no matter how much of it is based in historical, economic, or industrial inquiry. When the second premise, that nature is part of man, arrives, it is therefore a statement of the natural status of the human---human nature, or human essence. The pre-alienation version of "nature as part of man" is expressed thus: 

> "The universality of man manifests itself in practice in that universality which makes the whole of nature his *inorganic* body, (1) as a direct means of life and (2) as the matter, the object and the tool of his life activity" (328). 

The physial body of the human is extended my the material objects necessary for subsistence and production. What the human makes use of is understood to be part of the human, and becomes so through *universality*, the understanding of self as representative and embodiment of species. This extension of physical boundaries is inseparable from production: nature as inorganic body includes means of sustenance and means of production. It includes what will later become, through alienation, the variable costs of production---the costs of reproducing labor---and the fixed costs---the cost of the material means. This is well before the theory of the commodity would be formalized in the first volume of *Capital*, but the elements of labor that will eventually be objectified in the commodity are represented in their underlying form in nature, the substratum from which all value arises.[^ see that quote from Marx, definitely somehwere in mukherjee, about nature being the basis of value] 

[need more representative intro sentence] Even here, in the pre-commodity, pre-alienation state of human species-being, nature for the human exists primarily as it is understood through the object---or in a slightly different but related sense, objectively. The human interaction with nature is *active* and consists of transformation of nature through production, yes. But it is simultaneously *passive* in the extent to which the natural object exists for the human as an object of desire:

> the *objects* of his *** exist ouside him as *objects* independent of him; but these objects are objects of his *need*, essential objects, indispensable to the exercise and confirmation of his essential powers.…[Man] has *real, sensuous objects* as the object of his being and of his vital expression…he can only *express* his life in real, sensuous objects. (389-90) 

This passage is a continuation of Marx's dispute with Hegelian abstraction and the need to supercede the object of consciousness, and as such the object is transformed from something to be overcome in the passage from consciousness to self-consciousness into the medium in which the "corporeal man" operates. In his insistence on materiality, Marx also sets up a paradigm in which the object itself becomes part of the essence as one of the "essential objects" without which human essence not only lacks "confirmation," but is unable to be "exercise[d]." This passive version would be too close to the dependent consciousness that is superceded in the Hegelian progression were the object not made essential in expression of a material vitality, a truer version of life-expression rendered through "real, sensuous objects": an objectivity of being that exists in itself, for itself, and for others.[^c.f.? sentence too long?] The simultaneity of materiality and self-expression (self-expression *through materiality*) is why the dual Hegelian/"Naturalistic" framework of Marx's discussion of the object is so essential to his definition of the human as species-being. Conscious desire---and for Marx, consciousness is the unique domain of the human species---transforms the object from a simply "natural object" to a "human object" because it brings together human "being" and "knowing." Objects in the relevant sense only exist for the human when the both "are" and "are known": "Consequently, *human* objects are not natural objects as they immediately present themselves…. Neither objective nor subjective nature is immediately present in a form adequate to the *human* being" (391). The "adequate" object is one that has been transformed through the objective, essential powers of the human, but it is a transformation relying on the object as sensuous *and* as an object of knowledge. This new type of object is essential, because it is at the heart of *techne*,[^uuuh what] the type of object that, as means of production, can constantly supercede itself. Marx needs an object that can be revolutionized.

Returning to the topic that began this section---that the social is often equated with pre-alienated species-being in a crude sense, and that post-alienation species-being is effected via the social---allows the significance of this prosthetic essence to be understood. When the atomized individual is placed in a totality, its capabilities change. Its ability to effect material change on its environment can be expanded by technologies, tools it did not develop itself but rather that, as knowledge-objects, have to be understood as socially developed. (In reverse, an individual's ability change its physical environment can be physically prevented by the social totality; trying to build a house on the sidewalk is a material change that, in my neighborhood, would be pretty much impossible to achieve.) Because the individual's productive capabilities change in response to social conditions, according to Marx's definition of species *the essence of human species-being also changes in response to social conditions*. Consider the following passages in these terms: 

> [Animals] produce one-sidedly while man produces universally;…they produce only themselves, while man reproduces the whole of nature…. [N]ature appears as *his* work and his reality. The object of labour is therefore the *objectification of the species-life of man*: for man reproduces himself not only intellectually, in his consciousness, but actively and actually, and he can therefore contemplate himself in a world he himself has created. (329)

> In the *everyday, material industry*…we find ourselves confronted with the *objectified powers of the human essence*, in the form of *sensuous, alien, useful objects*, in the form of estrangement. (354)

> We have seen…what significance a *new mode of production* and a new *object* of production have. A fresh confirmation of *human* powers and a fresh enrichment of *human* nature. (359)

The first passage should be set against the assertion that the human changing nature is "nature changing itself." Clearly, the human changing itself is different from the animal that "produces…itself," and the only way to reconcile both the human and the animal considered as "natural" with this first passage is to gloss "produce" in "[animals] produce only themselves" as "reproduce." This is worth pointing out if only to underscore the extent to which the human here is truly *producing* itself by "reproducing the whole of nature," which we have seen is to be taken as "the inorganic body of man." For "man" to "contemplate himself in a world he himself has created" is a contemplation of the expanded self that constitutes the total essence. This full realization of species-being and essence requires a construction of the world "actively and actually," that is, materially, not only as a knowledge-object or projection of pure self-consciousness. Because this production of the world, the production of environment entire, is so fundamental to human essence, an encounter with the means of that production externalized *materially* becomes an encounter with the "powers" of that essence objectified, as in the second passage. In this prosthetic humanism, encountering the tool is encountering the self. But, crucially, the tools encountered here are not necessarily the products of the individual: "everyday material industry" has no reason to be understood narrowly as what the individual uses and the individual creates. Thus the third passage, in which the encounter with the means of production contineus to be an encounter with the extended self even as the those means of production are revolutionized and expanded. If the tools of active and actual construction are human essence objectified, some pressure has to be put on the final statements. Each change in the means of production may be a "fresh confirmation" of the essential powers, but it is not a confirmation of the *same* powers each time. Those powers have to be understood as changing, expanding. And by the logic established in these manuscripts, the "enrichment" of human nature will have, in some sense, to be a more fundamental change in essence. 

The revolution of the means of production is the revolution of the human species. It is at this point that Marx makes the statement with which we began. 

#"History is the true natural history of man"

This statement has to be put in its immediate context before it can be put in the context of the prosthetic essence:

> [A]s everything natural must *come into being*, so man also has his process of origin in *history*. But for him history is a conscious process, and hence one which constantly supersedes itself. History is the true natural history of man. (We shall return to this later.) (391)

To begin with the end: characteristically for these manuscripts, Marx does not clearly return to this statement in any systematic way, though it is implicitly continued in his model of history as supercession. (Which we actually shall return to later.) In this immediate context, though, there are some serious premises to be weighed. 

First, it is by no means assumed in any non-Hegelian model that "everything natural must *come into being*." Specifically in the discourse of essences, especially ideal essences, the topic is something that in most paradigms exists *as it is from the beginning*; it does not come into being, it *is*. To say that natural things "come into being" is to incorporate them into the Hegelian model of supercession and negation, directly in conflict with the Lyellian mode of gradualism that actually characterized much natural history of the mid-nineteenth century and would do so even more with the publication of *On the Origin of Species* some ten years later.^[yeah footnote this] Therefore, as has already been stated here, the natural essence in Marx is not a fixed entity, and the means of its development is Hegelain supercession and negation.

Second, the main, concluding statement is presupposed by following "everything natural must come into being somehow" with "*history* is how the natural human comes into being." History is therefore made into a natural process, which abides by the logic of including the human as part of nature. Nevertheless, including everything that falls under the category of Marxist-Hegelian *history* as natural reestablishes the loop in which human development of self and environment through industry constitutes a fundamental change in essence. This final point is underscored again by considering origin as "process," suggesting a gradual attainment of essence through action rather than essence as the always-already established substratum of what is "human." 

Third: the "consciousness" of history as the human mode of becoming appears to be a condition for Hegelian supercession, but since the non-human natural also comes into being through supercession "consciousness" is actually a condition of *constant* or endless becoming-through-supercession. Conscious historical process is a model of perpetual change, the endless renewing and reworking of tools that springs from human volition and social development. The endurance of this will and social-nature means that development of essence through supercession remains perpetual.

Finally, the statement itself. Its content is mostly a distillation of the above, except for the following: by pointing to history as the *true* natural history of man, Marx specifies the locus of the human essence, not in the unconscious, determined, received corporeal substratum, but in the version of the human that includes the mutable "inorganic body" of nature. Species-being defined by the "essential powers" is the fundamental aspect of the human. This species-being is part of a "naturalistic" paradigm, but it is always the active rather than the passive version of that paradigm that defines the human essence for Marx.

In what sense is history meant, though, and what does it mean materially for the human essence to take history as its "origin"? In a certain sense, to answer this question is to scale up the idea of technological, prosthetic essence above and arrive at "industry":

> It can be seen how the history of *industry* and the *objective* existence of industry as it has developed is the *open* book of the essential powers of man, man's psychology present in tangible form; up to now this history has not been grasped in its connection with the *nature* of man, but only in an external utilitarian aspect…. (354)

> *Industry* is the *real* historical relationship of nature, and hence of natural science, to man. …Nature as it comes into being in human history---in the act of creation of human society---is the *true* nature of man; hence nature as it comes into being through industry, though in an *estranged* form, is true *anthropological* nature. (355)

In many ways these statements merely settle further into what has already been established in terms of prosthesis. But turning the vague, undefined tool, nature that the natural human uses to alter other nature, he points to a naturalized sense of industry as a way of understanding the material history of human essence. Industry can be understood as both the "world he himself has created" from above and species-scale productive activity, the social version of species-being narrowed to a point. But then, Marx is not talking about industry itself as a static entity. Rather, he is drawing our attention to the "history" of industry on top of its "*objective*" state; the history of industry and the history of the human are extensively interacting here as they do in Marx's later work. So the "history" that is the "true natural history of man" has to be understood in terms of the history of industry, or in other words, the changing capabilities *of the species* through advancements in means of production.

We have arrived back in the familiar territory of Marx's later work and Marxist criticism since. The endless supercession that is inherent to human history runs through the historical-materialist paradigm of revolutions in and of the means of production. Each successive historical epoch is begat by the one preceding it; to reverse the emphasis and make it more Hegelian, each historical epoch produces the means of its own supercession and negation.^[c.f. -- see note in response for class] What Marx's *Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844* add to the discussion, though, is that this historical progress is now a way of thinking a mutable, constantly developing species-essence that is forever surpassing itself---forever breaking out of its own category, as Chakrabarty showed in his 2009 revitalization of the species discussion.

#Species-Being in the Anthropocene

Now, as Chakrabarty has shown us, biological species is no longer philosophically adequate---nor even scientifically adequate---to the human species. Prosthesis to the human essence, in tandem with Marx's often-missed^[until recently; see list including mukherjee foster etc.] engagement with nature, allows us to think a version of the human that changes in tandem with what it produces. In a sense, this is a restatement of what Chakrabarty has pointed us to: the species *has* scaled up according to its capacity for production in the most material sense, and not just in terms of population. If after Chakrabarty the human is no longer definable as purely biological species---recall that in his persuasive view, and if one accepts the Anthropocene in general, our species is also a geological force in a very real way---a return to this concept suggests that this is so because "essence" scales with material alteration of nature. Or perhaps it is the reverse: that it is the essence that is expanding, that is itself the "thing" worked on and through, and the alteration of nature increases as a natural concomitant. In either case the clear and present need for a new way to think of the human in the Anthropocene needs some statement that resolves the contradiction between history---industrial history---and natural history. Marx literally provides one: and though it may be vexed, it's a starting point.

I would like to conclude with a qualification of this project and a small selection of the long list of problems that this inquiry opens or comes into contact with but does not resolve. The qualification: there is very little less interesting or useful than dogmatism, and this paper is not meant to suggest that a *return to Marx* in itself is likely to yield solutions. As my largely non-linear approach to reading (or reorganizing) the *Manuscripts* will hopefully evince, this is a rethinking of the concept for which Marx provides the pieces (and which he puts to different uses) in terms of what we have learned since the second half of the twentieth century and what we will need to learn as soon as possible in the twenty-first. 

As such, here some problems this approach either leads to or does not resolve. The discomfort that many^[find some] have expressed with Chakrabarty's turn back to universals remains largely unresolved by this extension. One possible source of divergence, however, is that a *mutable*, *contingent* essence may be an essence that does not have to be understood as a universal. Putting some (necessary) pressure on the idea that there is indeed a single development of productive capabilities, rather than a multiplicity of productive capabilities mediated through differentials of wealth and sovereignty, could allow this historical-materialist view of the essence to describe more accurately the many, various experiences of being human. In this sence, the idea of "species-being" could actually be a route further from universals rather than back to them. The obvious risk of this would be inaugurating (or anyway, becoming complicit with) a discourse of speciation according to wealth and status. Finally, this is an undeniably, uncomfortably anthropocentric view of species, one that marginalizes non-human animals and non-human "nature" to the point of nonexistence. An extension of the reimagining in terms of the non-human "species" concept could be fruitful, perhaps beginning with the statement that animals also produce, but would be a topic for further study.


[what does this do to the species? /pivoting into a discussion of history; see about coming back for Donna Haraway later; it may be better ot just return to Chakrabarty later]
