---
title: Great Newes from the Barbadoes and Continuation of the State of New England
date: 22 September 2014
---

For the next two weeks, reading is "moderate-ish"; In October we begin talking about poetry; leave extra time for the 2.5k-line poem on Sugar

Lead poisoning was a huge danger of drinking rum & living in the Caribbean; wasn't really discovered till much later

Some questions for today

	- 1640s Barbados turns to becoming a sugar colony; result of arrival of Dutch colonists from Brazil. By mid 1640s about 30k people in Barbados, 1k of whom are slaves of African descent. By 1660 the number of enslaved africans roughly equal (~ 30k) to the number of whites; thereafter went to 50k enslaved Africans vs 20k whites. A centralization process also happened in sugar refineries, with small planters being squeezed out. Big planters want to be recognized as aristocracy in England, but it never really panned out. Barbados the "dunghill upon which England cast its rubbish"---ie rubbish people. 
	- And the bad behavior: colonizing Barbadians are thought to be both physically and morally degraded by life on Barbados and in that climate. But also surrounding yourself with slavery as an institution, like wealth, is thought to be a corrupting influence. ("Early model of social entropy")
	- good question: where does the demand for sugar come from? Confectionaries explode in the 18th century as a result of colonization, and thus massive increase of the sweet-toothed consumer class.
	- Degradation also thought to be climatological as much as anything
	- So how does a creole figure in the Barbados make his case to be included as the highest echelon of English society? You can assume a position of equality and sameness with the English and/or other colonial creolized subjects; hence "continuation of the state of etc."

Continuation of the State of New England

	- King Philip's War 1675-1678: *the* traumatic event of the 17th-c. new world. King Philip is drawn and quartered, his head displayed on a spike for upwards of 20 years in the front of the Plymouth colony
	- Anglo-Native treaties with which the document concludes is a way of the English ending off the violence with the natives
	- p. 19 shift to religious reading from the documentary mode; and more specifically of the behavior of the colonists after the rebellion; almost a Jeremiad, namely "god is punishing us because of all this shit we did"; but on the ohter hand, bizarrely, God's punishment is only a mark of his continued love (soul saving or some shit), ergo it becomes a kind of injunction for moral improvement; last-second revelation of the rebellion is a gift from god, demanding that we behave more humbly etc. etc. etc.

Great Newes from the Barbadoes

	- opening; note length of conspiracy; also notice that Ligon's method of preventing revolts, ie the Babel problem, is not maintained here because they are all from the gold coast; and the Cormantee are thought of as particularly rebellious 
	- note avoidance of representing a woman burned at the stake; somehow the doing is justifiable but the representation is unseemly