---
author: Phillip Polefrone (grad student)
title: Reading of *The Sugar-Cane*, Book 1, lines 266 - 277
coursename: Early Caribbean Literature
profname: Professor Silva
date: October 13, 2014
---

As art transforms the savage face of things,
And order captivates the harmonious mind;
Let not thy Blacks irregularly hoe:
But, aided by the line, consult the site
Of thy demesnes; and beautify the whole.
So when a monarch rushes to the war,
To drive invasion from his frightened realm;
Some delegated chief the frontier views,
And to each squadron, and brigade, assigns
Their order'd station; Soon the tented field
Brigade and squadron, whiten on the sight;
And fill spectators with an awful joy.

This passage of James Graiger's *The Sugar-Cane: A Poem* establishes order as an aesthetic category, and in doing so it links two disparate aspects of the British imperial impulse: agricultural exploitation and military conquest. By rendering these disparate processes as the extension of an aesthetic, Grainger does more than make a simple nature-culture distinction, though that is by no means irrelevant to what he does represent. In linking the two processes, he exposes the extent to which the pleasure both illicit in an assumed spectator relies on the appreciation of command, and more specifically the extent to which command allows for a renunciation of the material world in favor of a world of aestheticized abstractions. 

The opening two lines establish two dyads that organize the rest of the passage, "art" and "order" on one hand as aspects of the same thing, and "things" and "mind" on the other as the media in which art and order respectively exist. "Art" here, despite the presence of "beautif[ication]" later, should be understood as skilled action or (especially in this case) applied knowledge rather than as "art" in the modern sense. It is significant that "art" itself is given agency over "transform[ation]" rather than the wielder of that art, particularly because the same thing happens with "order" in the next line, which "captivates" the mind rather than the mind *appreciating* order: both become grammatical subjects. This grammatical structure effectively naturalizes both concepts, presenting them as things that happen or exist in themselves, without the intervention of a guiding or creating hand. This naturalization is necessary because "art" and "order" are being set up as principles to guide the intentional action to come, made ideals by which willful creation will shortly be judged. The second dyad established in the first two lines is between matter and mind, with transformative action of "art" associated with the world of "things," and mechanistically responsive perception associated with "mind." The former requires a state of disorder, that which is "savage," to exist if it is to effect its transformation. The latter can exist in itself, but requires the presence of a "harmonious" mind if it is to be perceived. The two processes are grammatically linked by the structure of the sentence, with following an "As" that sets them up as two example of the same principle. The aesthetic of order is thus established as simultaneously an act of transformation, an act of perception, and, above and containing both, an *a priori* category---though a category that is apparently only *a priori* to certain subjects, as will be suggested below.

Order can also be a standard demanded of labor, however, and as the next several lines demonstrate, the state of mind necessary to order is the unique domain of the ruling class; domination thus becomes a means of instilling order, and through order, beauty. The shift to the commanding mode can be seen immediately in "Let," which, imperative itself, also establishes the imperative mode as the ordering aesthetic's method. "Let" implies a commanding relationship between the presumably British reader and the "Blacks" performing labor, and it is through such a commanding relationship that Grainger leaves behind the naturalized inevitability of the first two lines. It is clear, then, that the "Blacks" who "irregularly hoe" are part of the "savage face of things" that must be transformed by art. Their own transformation *by* art comes about by their transformation of something *else* by an art passed on to them, however, linking the act of commanding and being commanded with process of making order. Furthermore, the assumption that without such a command the "Blacks" will hoe "irregularly" suggests that theirs are not minds "captivate[d]" by order, implicitly (and unsurprisingly) racializing the entire aesthetics. The dyad of the transformable world of things and the abstract realm of "mind," established in the opening couplet, is replicated again: this time in the contrast between the embodied order of a guided laborer, depicted in the third line, and the disembodied ordering through metnal labor, depcited in the fourth and fifth. The "line" by which the land is imaginatively ordered stands in here for abstract geometric thinking as a whole, a means by which the land can be understood through "consult[ation]" rather than direct, physical labor. This dialogue with the land on the abstract level of geometric forms can be taken as the projection of the "harmonious mind" "captivate[d]" by "order," and, in tandem with transformation of "savage" matter via command of labor into "art," it is the means of "beautify[ing] the whole" according to Grainger's aesthetics of order. Only through command is this harmonious mind able to act, however, not through direct labor; the third, fourth, and fifth lines clarify (probably unwittingly) that the only means of achieving this perfect aesthetic ordering is through domination.

The final seven lines extend the domain of the aesthetic of order to military conquest, suggesting that the source of the particular *pleasure* of war is the military chain of command, not glory or material flows of wealth and territory. As in the first five lines, aestheticized order is a product of command, but here bureaucratic command replaces a master-slave relationship. Four levels of the hierarchy---the "monarch," "some delegated chief," "squadron," and "brigade"---are specified to represent (and revel in) the complexity of the ordering process, and the command *structure* is emphasized over the individuals involved by the willful vagueness of the phrase "some delegated chief." Here the visual imposition of a system of order mirrors the use of the "line" above, with both ordering agents (the commander and the farmer) observing a field and projecting an abstract system onto it. Here it is the "chief" viewing the "frontier" and, like the farmer "consult[ing] the site / Of [his] demesnes," visualizing a transformation based on the lay of the land. The order instilled by this schema's realization, again through command, does lead to military victory, but it also significantly leads to an aesthetic achievement in the eyes of "spectators." There is some ambiguity in the line that follows, but "the tented field / Brigade and squadron" who soon "whiten on the sight" appear to be part of the invading force (not the victorious, ordering monarch), and their "whiten[ing]" a mark of their fear and implied defeat. Where one might expect an image of rout and glory, however, the effect of this defeat by order is something more akin to the "beautif[ication of] the whole" above. It is not the military who rejoices, but the spectators. The material gains and imperial progress are thus subjugated to the victory of the "harmonious mind" over the "savage face of things" represented by a frontier, whether that frontier be a badly managed field or a military front. For the British sugar colonies, where the frontier was sometimes both, appealing to the aesthetic pleasure of order as a peculiarly British (or at least European) achievement would have been a powerful rhetorical justification for continued colonial development and a sort of agricultural instruction manual at the same time.