---
author: Phillip Polefrone (graduate student)
title: Close Reading of Thomas Tryon's *Friendly Advice to the Gentlemen-Planters of the East and West Indies*
profname: Professor Silva
coursename: Early Caribbean Literatures
date: September 24, 2014
---

The passage I have chosen, which begins on page 113 ("This we are sure of, though…") and continues through the full paragraph on page 114, can be read as a dramatized failure to find a coherent basis for slavery as rendered from the perspective of an enslaved African. Through carefully controlled representations of those hierarchies themselves and the justifications that follow from them, Tryon's assumed character subverts not only the defense of slavery itself, but systemic justifications of power more broadly. He achieves this remarkable rhetorical feat in part by willfully confounding several forms of knowledge, turning these structures into and against each other to leave slavery-averse Christian as the only defensible basis of thought.

The first defense of slavery Tryon tries out and rejects is a religious one, and his rejection is based on the careful distinction of Christian dogma and true Christian practice from the debased form "Christianity" takes in the planters of the West Indies. He begins by breaking the dominant mode of rhetorical questioning, however briefly, with "This we are sure of," a strategy that places considerable emphasis on the statement that follows while hinting at the direct experience from which that surety derives. The topic of his certainty is that "though, your *Tongues* may be *Christian*, your *Hands* are *Heathen*." This metonymic distinction between word and action has two main effects. First, it reduces the persons of discussion to pure body (and not even whole body at that) in the rhetorical strategy of *effictio*, a technique for debasing the person represented that was widely known and plausibly familiar to someone of Tryon's tutored-seeming rhetorical abilities. Second, the split between "Tongues" and "Hands" significantly leaves out anything like the "Heart," "Mind," or "Spirit," thereby subtly precluding any possibility of religious sincerity on the part of the planters. Even the first, linguistic half of this binary, however, is set aside, leaving only the "*Hands*" that are "*Heathen*"---in other words, leaving only non-Christian action: "nay, most times your *very Language* is contrary to your before-mentioned Pretensions." In this disavowal we get "Pretensions" in the place of the thought or passionate belief missing from the previous "Tongues" and "Hands" binary, such that the only reference to the mind is in terms of false assumption or affectation. With devout language taken away as a defense of the planters, their actual language arrives to disprove their "Pretension" and reveal their true character: they "*Rant*, and *Rave*, and *Swear*, and *Curse*, and call devilish *Names* so fast upon the least thing," all very un-Christian and the last three directly blasphemous. The undercurrent of this first part of Tryon's argument, then, is accusation of blasphemy through false invocation of Christianity. The religious defense has been dismissed by way of disputing the religiosity of those who claim it, thereby poisoning the well for future such defenses. 

In the next stage of his argument, Tryon briefly tests out other possible defenses, anticipating counter-arguments by appealing to other common means of justifying power through hierarchized structures of knowledge; each of these possibilities in turn is either ignored or set aside to be picked up later. After dismissing the alleged Christianity of the planters, he suggests that perhaps "not by the virtue of your Religion, but by some super-excellent or higher Dignity of Nature above us, you claim a Right to make us your Slaves and Vassals." Here again we may see the strategy of wrong-footing into blasphemy by careful representation of possible arguments: the pantheistic "higher Dignity of Nature" seems, by the grammar of the passage, to be set up as "higher" than "Religion"; even if not (it could be read "a dignity of nature higher than ours"), the separation of nature from the divine would itself be theologically suspect. Whether or not the suggestion is blasphemous, though, Tryon needs a source for this "Dignity of Nature," and supplies three possibilities: "Descent or Pedigree," "different Fabrick of…Bodies," and "extraordinary *Endowments* of Mind." First, an ancestral justification is invoked, which includes not only the *fact* of birth (i.e., "Descent"), but the British legal, cultural, and governmental structures that arise from that fact (via "Pedigree"). This first option, lineage, is taken up in the final section of his argument, and is addressed below. Second, Tryon suggests a physiological basis for superiority. He appears at first to concede (by not refuting) that such a difference could indeed legitimate domination; careful use of the term "Fabrick," however, sets up the metaphor by which he refutes it later, in which skin and other bodily features become mere garments of no real substance (see 114-16). The final suggested basis of domination is superiority of "Mind." This would appear to refer to modes of speciation according mental capacity, sometimes used (with an assumption of African inferiority) to justify the broad separation of human and animal. This is not explicitly refuted, but it is implicitly belied by Tryon's choice of an enslaved African as his mouthpiece; if the speaker is calmly dismantling the interlocutor's objections, he is not a mental inferior.

In the final step of the passage's argument, Tryon returns to the "Descent or Pedigree" argument for superiority, and in dismantling it replaces the system of patrilineage that is the basis of British power and property with an implicitly superior, Christian sense of descent: from Adam. With a flourish of characterization that asserts the speaker's alterity and is thus mocking ("Even I, a non-Christian, know this"), Tryon's character asks whether it is not so that "the Oracles of your Religion oblige you to believe" that all people are descended from Adam, saying "your" and "you" rather than "our" and "us." He continues to invoke the language of ancestry and family to refute those very concepts themselves, at least in the British sense of them. According to a Christian (rather than patrilineal in a worldly sense) logic of inheritance, true belief requires all humanity to be considered "as good Parentage, as ancient a Family, as noble a Descent as the best," taken as "Kinsmen, and of the same Lineage." This argument is far from trivial^[To digress briefly and anachronistically, the argument that slavery is immoral because all people come from the same act of creation was trenchant enough that it lasted into the 19th century regarding American slavery. The main argument against it was maintained via the polygenetic theories of biologists as influential as Aggasiz and Cuvier.] and its potential ramifications are not bound to the topic of slavery. What is called into question here is the very source of all power that does not come from conquest or independent wealth, and it is called into question by the only thing nominally supreme to it. The logic of this statement, if it is to effectively wipe out family distinctions hundreds (thousands?) of generations from Genesis by making all people "Brethren," would by the same logic have to delegitimate the monarchy, aristocracy, and all inheritance. The idea is not elaborated upon, but this very assertion of the supremacy of the religious Patrilineage over the secular patrilineage is the bait-and-switch by which the final piece of the argument is resolved. The appeal to "Pedigree" is refuted by the irrelevance of that pedigree. This maneuver is achieved by a return to the topic with which the passage began: the assertion of true religion over worldly vulgarity and an appeal to religious doctrine. The rhetorical strategy of the passage, then, is to establish the impossibility of slavery in the Christian ethic and then to deny all forms of knowledge and hierarchy beyond it. 