---
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
profname: Professor Austin Graham
coursename: American Fiction and the Practice of Historicism
title: Position Paper - Domestic Labor and Social Spaces in *The Professor's House*
bibliography: cather.bib
csl: mla.csl
---

Housekeepers keep showing up in unexpected places in *The Professor's House*. It may be more precise to say in "unexpected *forms*": among the many housekeepers we have Henry Atkins, a "castaway Englishman" who cooks and cleans for traveling cowboys and shepherds (196 v); the impromptu archaeologists Tom and Roddy, for whom "excavating" and "housekeeping" become inextricably linked (211 v); even the "wind and sun," which, as Roddy puts it, "are good house-keepers" for the preserved cliff city (208 v). The uses housekeeping is put to are even more surprising than its pecular forms, though, for these are uses that go far beyond what one might think of as good housekeeping. Many of the tasks domestic labor performs in *The Professor's House* are in fact tasks more usually reserved for the historian. The wind and sun tidy up the mesa's cliff city, but in doing so they also keep it "preserved...like a fly in amber," making the lost civilization it embodies accessible centuries later (202 v). The "housekeeping" that Tom, Roddy, and Henry perform in the city continues this work, not only excavating but further guarding the city's objects, effectively turning them into artifacts. Finally, only St. Peter's jealously guarded rituals of domestic labor in arranging and maintaining his attic office enable him to transmit Tom's experience of the cliff city to the historical archive---and in the end, Tom's account is the only form in which the city will remain intact. But why would Willa Cather have domestic labor underwrite the pursuit of historical knowledge? How do these peculiarly capacious forms of domesticity relate to the more traditional, heterosexist versions that are also represented in the novel? And in what ways does this hybrid of domestic and historical labor end up redefining both?

I intend to argue here[^a] that to understand domestic labor's relation to history as a discipline we have to understand it as a simultaneous construction of space and of social forms. In many places in the novel, queering housekeeping becomes a way to narratively dissolve the heterosexist division of labor, but because of its dual nature it also becomes a means for constructing queer *spaces*. Housekeeping and history-making are able to be combined because, in Cather's versions of them, they each trouble the separation of productive labor and domestic labor by their position between the two types. The productive nature of history is shown to rely on and concern itself with certain domestic paradigms, while those domestic paradigms are repurposed to become productive. The history-housekeeping hybrid, then, becomes a kind of work that disrupts the binary of work inside and outside of the home, a division that previous research suggests Cather found oppressive throughout her life.[^1] Finally, this understanding of the domestic elements of historical knowledge will allow me to recontextualize Tom's perplexing identification with the cliff city. Reading his own queer domesticity in relation to the traces he uncovers in the mesa reveals a form of historical knowledge based on transhistorical cultural identification, a form willfully ignorant of nation and genealogy.[^2] Building on Caroline Levine's recent work in *Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network*, I will suggest that this identification is based on the recognition of his own disruptive social form (the queer domestic arrangement with Roddy) in the spatial organization of the cliff city.

[To begin this exploration today, I am just going to look at a few passages that will be central to my reading of the Outland portion of the novel. This will necessarily ignore the more traditional heterosexist division of labor that I'm claiming Cather intends to subvert, but it will establish what I see as her rebuttal to it and the sense in which domestic construction of space is also social construction. These paragraphs will probably appear somewhere in the first part of the paper, but there will be more setup in terms of existing criticism and perhaps Levine.]

# Cather's Housekeeping

Why would housework be so important as to invade parts of the novel that seem to have no need of it? One possible, even inevitable answer is that housework is simply one of Cather's preoccupations, and that it finds its way into much of what she writes in some way or another. This response would certainly seem plausible given the two chapters Ann @Romines devotes to Cather's housework interest in *The Home Plot: Women, Writing & Domestic Ritual*. "Throughout her writing life," Romines argues, "Cather was engaged with the problem of domestic ritual....[It] was baggage she could neverly entirely abandon, for it was essentially a part of herself" (133). The form this problem takes is often as "encounters...when 'an original mind' wrestled with double loyalties to the life of the household, the stuff of home plots, and the impulse to run away, expressed in many canonical male escape plots" (135). M. Catherine @Downs extends a version of this argument to Cather's journalism, suggesting that Cather's anxiety over "real" labor and domestic labor played out through the pen names under which she published her writing for periodicals and newspapers. As a writer and editor for *Home Monthly*, for example, she signed different (and differently gendered) names to write on topics covering the full range from what Romines calls "home plots" to "escape plots." Her anonymity allowed her to take up topics mostly of interest to the groups with which she least wanted to identify, women whose labor was entirely domestic. To write for such a market, Downs suggests, Cather adopted "a deliberately 'feminine' voice…to elaborate feminine ideologies and obligations and for the first time perhaps, to create meaning from these for herself" (69). Even as someone else, though, she was far from comfortable with the restriction this topic implied. Though she would voice, as "Helen,"" some of these "feminine ideologies and obligations," she would also push against the boundaries of domesticity through discussions of literature: "By writing about adventure stories, Cather could write about the other world outside the home, worlds forbidden to proper Helens. Helen, although seated by her fireside, voyaged to foreign lands in the books she discussed" (73). It is not difficult to see how such a common theme across several genres of her work would find its way into *The Professor's House* as well.

Housekeeping's prevalence across her work, however, merely contextualizes its specific function in *The Professor's House* without explaining what that function is or how domestic labor takes on a unique character in the novel. Before turning to the novel itself to understand Cather's peculiar housekeeping, it will be helpful to understand the outlines of the connection between housekeeping, space, and behavior as it was understood in the decades leading up to the novel's publication. Although in many senses they were at their most embedded in everyday family life in America, the traditional structures of domestic labor were also contested sites from the second half of the nineteenth century through the first decades of the twentieth, both for thier own sake and as platforms from which to call for larger social change.[^6] Going at least as far back as Catherine Beecher's early housekeeping manual in 1841---which she expanded with help from her sister, Harriet Beecher Stowe---women were writing to establish models of a new domestic labor, both in manuals like Beecher's and womens periodicals like the ones for which Cather would later write (@Fryer 28). A few decades later in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Melusina Fay Peirce, wife of Charles Sander Peirce and lifelong domestic reformer, had begun organizing a domestic labor cooperative in which women would ultimately begin to demand economic remuneration for their housekeeping, a movement buttressed by Peirce's articles in the *Atlantic* (@Fryer 36). This incorporation of domestic labor into the productive economy would ultimately be picked up in Charlotte Perkins Gilman's *Women and Economics* of 1898. 

Many of the writers, like Stowe, whom Hawthorne would notoriously refer to as "scribbling women" were scribbling their way out of a system of uncompensated labor by imagining new social structures, but they were also imagining new spaces. Judith Fryer documents the history of this particular instatiation of the literary spatial imaginary, pointing out movements like Perice's as well as more audacious attempts (Gilmans and those of Marie Stevens Howland) to construct massive cooperative housekeeping centers and kitchenless houses. Somewhere between a commune and a live-in hotel, these structures imagined a life in which a female-male gender binary would no longer map onto a domestic-productive labor binary (Fryer 36-8). It is significant that communal economic models are the means by which these re-imaginings intervene in the gendered binary of labor, and it is also significant that these communal models are enabled by carefully designed space. These facts taken in tandem imply a continuum between gender, labor, space, and literature that invites careful reading of narrative contructions of the home as a site in which all of these factors come to be altered by the same set of forms.

Domestic reform, then, was a movement that closely imbricated writing with communal structures, gendered social forms, and the transformation of space; housekeeping is the narrative mechanism by which Cather effects these alterations. Romines discusses the "domestic ritual" as "rituals performed in a house, a constructed shelter, which derive meaning from the protection and confinement a house can provide." Like most rituals, she argues via Orrin E. Klapp, they contain "symbolic value, emotional meaning and (usually) a 'dramatic' group-making quality" (12). Romines focuses on the preservative aspect of domestic rituals, and that will become important in reading Cather's use of domesticity below. But it is essential to include the spatially transformative aspects of such rituals as well: domesticity includes routine maintenance, but it also includes more positive actions that determine the structures of the shelter and the system by which its resources are managed. These inclusions might be rephrased as design and economy. When it is able to be reimagined beyond the "protection and confinement" of the shelter through domestic reform schemes, domestic labor becomes a paradigm for determining social, environmental, and economic structures. This is the sense in which, I argue, Cather's use of domestic labor must be understood.

One has to be careful about seeming to align Cather with female domestic reformers of the period, though, because of her notoriously conflicted relationship with feminine identification. As we have already seen in Downs's study of her journalism, entirely new personalities needed to be developed in order for her to find a way to enter the discussions which in which the domestic reformers dwelt by necessity, and by "aligning herself with male critics and authors,...and by going to school, Cather gave herslef a profession, removing herself" from a lived feminine identity. Reclaiming her for queer theory has also been a conflicted task, however. On one hand, as Marilee Lindemann pointed out in 1999, theorists like Eve Sedgwick to Judith Butler have found useful material in Cather's work and critics like Larry Rubin and Judith Fetterley have "combed the novels and short stories for signs of how sexuality is translated into textuality, for evidence of lesbianism masked in order to evade detection and censure" (9). More recently, though, her queerness has been distinctly more contested. As Heather Love notes in her book from 2007, "the problem of claiming Cather as 'one of ours'" has been a somewhat intractable one due to her hostility toward "public expressions of same-sex desire" and her own identity have caused her "de-queering" in scholarship and her contemporary reception (74).[^7] While updating the housekeeping discussion from Romines's 1992 discussion of it might be a fruitful ground for reengaging the topic of queerness as such in Cather's work, here considering it instead as a method of *queering* will allow the transformative aspects of domestic labor to be considered as a way of reformulating spatial and social forms at once. Transformative domestic labor can then be a way of constructing and discovering utopian spaces[^8] that is as important in terms of environment, economics, and historiography as it has been shown to be in terms of gender.

#Henry's Invisible Labor

Following Cather's lead, the most useful housekeeping will be found in the least expected places. While the more recognizable domestic labor occurring in Godfrey St. Peter's home is important and will need to be discussed, it is the alternative forms of masculinized housekeeping in the "Tom Outland's Story" section that will be most useful in isolating the utopian aspects of housekeeping.

Henry Atkins has been subject to a peculiar silence in the criticism on *The Professor's House*. Perhaps in part due to Eve Sedgwick's focus on Tom and Roddy as a "gorgeous" homosocial romance,[^3] the understanding of the "family" in the Tom Outland section has largely reinforced a binary family structure, the very structure which I suggest the emphasis on housekeeping helps to rupture. Even though it is not until Henry's arrival that Tom and Roddy, "foundlings" both,[^5] become part of a "happy family," most commentary that talks about this familiality at all talks over Henry's constitutive role in it. Heather Love focuses on the binary "male friendship" in the relationship between Tom and Godfrey St. Peter, and although she recognizes that both "Harry's death and Roddy's departure" cause the "end to Tom's period of male-male intimacy," these disruptions are subsumed by what she sees as a Benjaminian "love at last sight" between Tom and Roddy (75-86). Despite his interest in the family as it relates to citizenship and cultural antecedents, Walter Benn Michaels touches on this three-part family only briefly as "one such model of America as 'a family matter'"---and this model shares a sentence with Louie Marsellus, who interests Michaels much more (234). 

The reasons for this critical indifference are clear, and for the same reasons putting increased emphasis on Henry here might seem to go against the grain of the narrative: he appears a minor character, and would seem to be at most ancillary to a plot much more interested in Tom, Roddy, and Godfrey St. Peter. That there is no clear need for Henry to appear, however, is all the more reason to read him carefully. If he is not advancing the plot, than he must fill some other, less obvious need. 

And indeed, he does: this British drifter who cooks, cleans, and decorates for Tom and Roddy is ignored because his importance does not come into focus without an explicit emphasis on housekeeping, which provides the means by which he disrupts the heterosexist binary preserved even by an intimate homosocial friendship. His role in the cabin's "happy family" causes an ambiguity in the neat division of domestic labor and productive labor by both reforming the domestic *space* of the cabin and the domestic routines of the social arrangements among the men who inabit it. By moving this family from a binary to a communal form, Henry also narratively enables the the three-person family to access the Mesa in which they find traces of a utopian, anti-heterosexist domesticity. It is a shift consistent with the kind of friendships that have been of great interest to recent queer theorists, allowing a reading of the cabin (with its cowboy housekeeping) and the cliff city (with its environmentally enforced communalism) as queer domestic spaces.

What readings of Henry and his place in the family do exist rightly point out that the men transform a traditional, family-like social structure into a less familiar, but nevertheless stable, relationship. As Marilee @lindemann_willa_1999 points out, for example, it is both a "queering...of the American classic as the tale of a free boy's adventures" and an alternative to a heterosexual family: Tom, Roddy, and Henry "can make of themselves 'a happy family'...devising their own patterns of living, working, and caring for one another without interference from the other world below" (103). What this reading does not account for, however, is that this alternative to the heterosexual family is explicitly developed and maintained through the evolving structure of the men's domestic labor. Life in the cabin develops on a trajectory from a state of natural, disordered cleanliness to a state of *human*, domestic cleanliness. And as this shift in the space occurs, the social structure with which it is mutually constitutive becomes increasingly queered. 

The first type of domesticity maps closely with masculinist adventure stories that Lindemann suggests Cather is "queering," in that it recalls hackneyed tropes of a man or men in uneasy harmony with "nature"---a relationship at times contestatory, at times transcendent, but always manly. Cather's version of this trope, though, is filtered through the narrative construction of the home, and in her hands the porous man-nature boundary of the adventure genre becomes a porous home-nature boundary. When Tom and Roddy arrive, the landscape itself has already compromised any clear distinction of the out-of-doors from the home and family: "The grama grass grew right up to the door-step, and the rabbits were running about and the grasshoppers hitting the door.... There was no litter around, it was as clean as a prairie-dog's house" (187). The outside is trying to get inside; or rather, the outside is trying to *become* the inside. This home sheltered by the mesa establishes a liminal space between the familiar dichotomy of adventuring, nature and culture. As such, it has its own standards of domesticity, as in the peculiar cleanliness established by the intrusion of the natural. Gus Reynolds points out that this "shelter" where "the grass grows right up to the door" creates a "seamless connection with the terrain." This dwelling and many others from Cather's work---"Ivar's sod hut in *O Pioneers!*, the Shimerdas' dugout, Ántonia's fruit cave"---"accept the constraints of the environment and find an aesthetic emerging from the necessitites of the landscape" (5). If they find an aesthetic in the landscape, it is an aeshthetic that is partially enforced by the ordering of housekeeping: like the cliff city that has "wind and sun" for "house-keepers," the cabin is tidy and carefully ordered without being "clean" in a human, domestic sense. And although it cannot be taken as clean in the sense familiar to domestic standards, the comparison to a prairie-dog's house demands re-thinking of what it means to "make a home": just as the prairie-dog fashions its own home out of the earth, Tom and Roddy fashion their cabin out of a space whose naturalness Cather insists upon. 

This animalistic paradigm of space-construction maps, curiously, to one of the only occasions when the domestic arrangement is specifically gendered. To conclude the paragraph that defines the oscillation between home and landscape, Tom dubs the setting "the sort of place a man would like to stay in forever" (187). The masculine version of domesticity with which Cather begins in the Outland chapter---that is, a version still recognizable within a heterosexist set of identities---is finally recognized as no kind of domesticity at all. Contemplating the cabin's crude "cook-stove," Tom looks forward yearningly "to cooking on an iron stove with four holes" (188). It is a wish that will not be possible in the space like this one that is so heavily defined by its liminality.

The relationship between the two men may be masculine and homosocial in terms of gender, but in its division of labor it remains distinctly heterosexist. That is, it does not disrupt the productive-domestic labor binary structurally, instead merely allowing fluidity in which partner is able to inhabit those roles. Tom and Roddy develop a system of alternation between the productive and the domestic: "One man was with the herd while the other got his sleep and did the cooking at the cabin. The mesa was our only neighbor, and the closer we got to it, the more tantalizing it was" (189). The men take turns as housekeeper and worker, and although the temporality of the bourgeois working day is disrupted, the roles that support it continue to exist as a binary. The monolithic mesa, humanized as a silent neighbor, stands over the gap where another person (or other people) would be. It is not immediately clear why this abrupt transition occurs to neighborlessness in general, however, or why the mesa is so "tantalizing." The turn can certainly, in part, be explained by the lack of any company but each other's and a longing for adventure, but it serves a different function narratively. It establishes negatively a third element that would, and will, break the frame of a binary social relationship, and its appearance at this moment anticipates the communal structures they will find in the mesa itself. 

Henry's sudden appearance fills the void that is exposed by the neighborly mesa, and by displacing the naturalistic housekeeping of the homosocial adventure tale, he interrupts the binary structure of the labor relationship and queers the entire domestic space. No longer is the cabin a "prairie-dog's house," but it is not a suburban living room, either. Instead, it becomes something entirely new:

> Life was a holiday for Blake and me after we got old Henry. He was a wonderful cook and a good housekeeper. He kept that cabin shining like a playhouse; used to dress it all out with piñon boughs, and trimmed the kitchen shelves with newspapers cut in fancy patterns. He had learned to make up cots when he was a hospital orderly, and he made our bunks feel like a Harvey House bed. To this day that's the best I can say for any bed. And he was such a polite, mannerly old boy; simple and kind as a child. I used to wonder how anybody so innocent and defenceless had managed to get along at all, to keep alive for nearly seventy years in as hard a world as this. Anybody could take advantage of him. (195)

The "holiday" of life with Henry is a state of exception from the normal capitalist, heterosexual order. Similarly, the extent to which the cabin becomes a "playhouse" both disrupts the necessary endurance of masculine adventuring and the sense of the "home" as a space in dialectical relation with "work," establishing it as a third space that enables the ludic and the child-like to exist without trouble from the world beyond. This transformation of the social makeup of the space is explicitly rendered as a transformation of the space itself. What used to be a subsumption of domestic space by the natural out-of-doors now becomes a domestication of the natural with the "piñon boughs" serving as decorations. With a domesticated natural world comes a distinct separation of the formerly ambiguous inside and outside. The "Harvey House bed" refers to a chain of railroad hotels founded by Frederick Henry Harvey, an hotelier whose efforts would earn him the epithet "civilizer of the West" (@Kelley). Spatial transformation leading from Henry's arrival in the family inaugurates a level of "civilized" comfort that overwrites the homosocial domestic space of the frontier. At the same time, he introduces a corresponding social paradigm of "polite, mannerly" behavior. When the binary social structure is broken by this third party, space and behavior shift accordingly. The continuum of social, behavioral, and spatial forms is established in this moment of their mutual determination.

The space is not a traditional domestic space, though, and neither is the family with which it is mutually constituted. Henry's place in this revision of the family is partially that of the child (purely a beneficiary of productive labor and source of play) and wife (the uncompensated domestic laborer and manager of the home). Henry's labor is explicitly not able to be remunerated, according to the man who employs Tom and Roddy; instead he is fed and sheltered (194). When Tom and Roddy regret being unable to offer him a wage to continue working with them in the cliff dwellings, he happily joins them regardless (204). The paternalism of this setup is ambiguous, mirroring the structural position of the wife in the conditions of labor even as its apparent dependence and subordination to two superior roles make it more similar to the role of child. But through all this he remains masculine. Tom carefully points out that "He shaved every morning and was as clean as a pin" before saying that "the three of us made a happy family" (196). The way family is established among the three of them is through Tom and Roddy's imaginative identification with Henry's lineage, a historical legacy to which neither of them has access or relation. When Henry discusses "his family, and the work they'd done, and the great age to which they lived, and the brandy puddings his mother made," Tom and Roddy can only "strain [their] imagination trying to visualize such a family dinner party" (204). The irony, of course, is that Henry has brought an alternative version of this family structure into the cabin, one in which Tom and Roddy are uniquely able to participate. 

Henry changes more than the space and the labor structure: Tom is clear in suggesting that he makes a "family" out of the arrangement even though in many ways Henry seems to take Tom and Roddy further from the heterosexist structure with which they began. Since this difference does not prevent them from being a family, then, they must be in some way changing what is meant by "family." The family created by the new domestic paradigm *imagines* itself in terms of the historical genealogy of family as a way of asserting its distance from that genealogy.

It is essential for the queering of domestic labor that this new family not map neatly to the structure of a traditional family, as Cather's refusal to let it do so is her means of rupturing the labor binary. Henry's labor is domestic, but because the structure separating productive labor and domestic labor has been broken, his work is able to be imported into the productive sphere. When Tom and Roddy are finally able to begin excavating the cliff city in earnest, Henry comes with them as a collaborator without abandoning his nature as a housekeeper. His inclusion in the productive labors of Tom and Roddy end up changing the nature of the work itself, as their amateur archaeology begins to take on the lexicon of domestic labor.

> We brought old Henry up by the new horse-trail and began housekeeping. We were now ready for what we called excavating....Henry, besides doing the housekeeping, was very eager to help us in the 'rew-ins,' as he called them. He was more patient than we, and would dig with his fingers half a day to get a pot out of a rubbish pile without breaking it. After all, the old man had a wider knowledge of the world than either of us, and it came in handy. (211-2 v)

In some ways, of course, Henry remains unequal in the three-way relationship. Where Tom and Roddy are exploring as partners, he is still "brought," a refusal of any legitimately agentive action. Henry's restriction from agency differs from the way children or wives would be forbidden agency in the corresponding heterosexual family, though, because of his peculiar dual nature as an elder and a dependent. The talents that make him a good housekeeper, which might become a rationale for his relegation to an unremunerated subordinate role, instead make him a uniquely valuable worker. The "patient" carefulness with which he removes artifacts from the "rubbish pile" becomes continuous with his "wider knowledge of the world." Even though Henry remains a somewhat deemphasized member of the group---always somewhat ancillary to what is understood to be the deeper parternship between Tom and Roddy---his domestic contributions take on a broader significance when the domestic sphere is no longer prevented from being considered productive.[^4] What was previously a revision only of the domestic sphere has now become a reconception of the productive sphere.

The result of Henry's increasing importance in an increasingly communal model of friendship that displaces the binary homosocial relationship of Tom and Roddy. The progress toward a social form that less resembles the heterosexual marriage makes Henry's "happy family" the type of relationship that has been of interest to recent queer theory. Indeed, in her discussion of Cather and *The Professor's House*, Heather Love taps into this "reactivated" concern with the "history and the philosophy of friendship" to read Tom's relationships with both Roddy and Godfrey St. Peter. From Foucault, she takes an understanding of "friendship as an alternative form of intimacy, a utopian space beyond the constraints of marriage and the family"; from Aristotle, a view of it "as an autonomous space, as free from the machinations of power as it is from the shocks of desire" (76-7). Throughout her reading, she focuses on the autonomy and exceptional spaces that friendship enables. It allows the creation of new social relationships while also serving a "stabilizing role...in imagining queer existence and queer community" (79). This simultaneous inventiveness and stability characterizes very well the form that Henry's arrival at the cabin initiates, and although Love goes on to introduce trouble and loss into her understanding of the friendship between Tom and Roddy, there is more to be exposed in the communal structures of the cabin and the mesa that their unique friendship enables---before, as she says, it collapses into a form of loss. Before loss casts them back into a state of separation and "feeling backward," the quotidian domestic routines they establish as a threesome allow them to connect across time with corresponding forms in the cliff city.

#From Domesticity to Community

[Narrative importance of Henry... sentence about these are the stakes of noticing him. Then paragraph has to wrap up and point to the next section on the cliff city, after briefly arguing that the cliff stuff can't happen without him.] Insofar as Henry's unique role in the family constitutes a new structure, it is the new family structure itself that ends up being essential to their excavation of the cliff city. Quite literally, their access to the lost civilization is contingent on this structure. The men's transition from a binary homosocial relationship to a queered familial structure is the basis of Tom's identification with the cliff city. **Michaels, Cather's ID across time**

[ This section should detail the echoes between the communal structures established in their relationship and those found in the city. This should also be the place to talk about the rejection of domesticity as such elsewhere. ]

- "They were probably wiped out, utterly exterminated, by some roving Indian tribe without culture or domestic virtues, some horde that fell upon them in their summer camp and destroyed them for their hides and clothing and weapons, or from mere love of slaughter." (221 v) 

    - domestic virtues are apparently the connection with environment; see "built themselves into this mesa and humanized it"; connection with space both replaces and defines the social, somehow. Think of the way that domestic labor ends up being both social and spatial.

## Cliff dwelling in general

- "The notion stuck me like a rifle ball that this mesa had once been like a bee-hive; it was full of little cliff-hung villages, it had been the home of a powerful tribe, a particular civilization." (202 v)

    - bee-hive suggests certain organizational and communal practice in addition to structure

- "The town in the cliffs explained the irrigation ditches. Like all pueblo Indians, these people had had their farms away from their dwellings. For a stronghold they needed rock, and for farming, soft earth and a water main." (203 v) 

    - literal separation of work and home

- "It was evidently a kind of communal kitchen, where they roasted and baked and probably gossiped." (209 v)

    - communal labor dismantles the usual bourgeois heterosexual division of labor
    - cf Tom's confession of looking forward to cooking

## Design

- "There is unquestionably a distinct feeling for design in what you call the Cliff City. Buildings are not grouped like that by pure accident, though convenience probably had much to do with it. Convenience often dictates very sound design."

    - emphasis on purposive construction of space

- "Your people were cut off here without the influence of example or emulation, with no incentive but some natural yearning for order and security. They built themselves into this mesa and humanized it." (221 v) (cf 194 v) 

    - could just as easily be about this ad hoc family as anything, tom henry roddy. could argue that this "your people" posits this shared sensibility as the basis of Tom's identification with the cliff-city
 - The defeat of queer domesticity: Harry's death coinciding with the narrative of the civilization's destruction by those without "domestic virtue"

#The Transtemporal, Transmaterial Mirror

[ Most explicit engagement with Levine should happen here. Triangular conversation between Michaels, Levine, and Love (only passages about transtemporal idnetification, follow up on her sources) should let me ]

 - The mesa/cabin's connection to St. Peter's room, more generally domestic labor enabling historical pursuit financially. Need more about history as itself a liminal domestic/productive space?

 - Expanding on Levine to talk about the mutual influence of space/social forms/historical forms. The idea is that each of these establishes a closed and self-sustaining system based on domestic labor structures larger (or other) than the family. Can I argue that this is really a "form"? How narrow does it have to get?

 - "To people off alone, as we were, there is something stirring about finding evidences of human labour and care in the soil of an empty country. It comes to you as a sort of message, makes you feel differently about the ground you walk over every day. I liked the winter range better than any place I'd ever been in. I never came out of the cabin door in the morning to go after water that I didn't feel fresh delight in our snug quarters and the river and the old mesa up there, with its top burning like a bonfire." (194 Vintage) (cf 221 v)

[
# Still to come in the Harry/Mesa section: 

 - Harry the Housekeeper initiates a kind of family not possible in homosocial relationship; also narratively enables the entry to the mesa.

 - Way in which housekeeping literally uncovers the secrets of the mesa and its community; archaeology rendered as housekeeping.

 - connection between the city's organization and the social structures it implies. Reading of space.


]

[^a]: In this "position paper," I'm just circulating a few paragraphs of analysis of Tom and Roddy's relationship prior to Henry's introduction.

[^1]: I think it's in *Becoming Modern* or *Queering America*?

[^2]: This will form a kind of response to the Walter Benn Michaels essay, "The Vanishing American," that we read in class.

[^3]: As @lindemann_willa_1999 mentions in a footnote, Eve @sedgwick_across_1989 discusses Tom Outland's story as explicitly homosocial (103 n. 38).

[^4]: At what point do I want to point out Fleissner's similar arguments about Gilman?

[^6]: Some shit's probably gotta happen in a footnote here.

[^7]: I defer here to Heather Love's excellent contemporary overview of the scholarship on queerness in Cather's life and work (72-5, 178n.3).

[^8]: Without, or at least prior and in addition to, the loss on which Love's argumetn is predicated.

When Cather uses housekeeping to reconstruct space, then, she does so as a way to reconstruct gendered social relationships.
