---
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
profname: Professor Austin Graham
coursename: American Fiction and the Practice of Historicism
title:  Domesticating History - Queering Housekeeping as a Historical Paradigm in "Tom Outland's Story"
bibliography: cather.bib
csl: mla.csl
---

*[Hi, Austin! Just a reminder that, as we discussed, I'm kind of thinking of this as part of a much larger project on American "ecotopias" in roughly this period. As such, I'm being pretty frank in some of the footnotes about what still needs to be developed---whether it's needing a better basis for putting Cather in certain historical lineages or outlining terms that I'd need to define more fully elsewhere, like "ecotopia." Thanks for your patience with those moments, and I look forward to any feedback you can offer. --Phil]*

Housekeepers keep showing up in unexpected places in the "Tom Outland's Story" section of *The Professor's House*. It may be more precise to say in "unexpected *forms*": among Cather's many housekeepers are Henry Atkins, a "castaway Englishman" who cooks and cleans for traveling cowboys and shepherds (194); the impromptu archaeologists Tom and Roddy, for whom "excavating" and "housekeeping" become inextricably linked (211); even the "wind and sun," which, as Roddy puts it, "are good house-keepers" for the preserved cliff city (206). The uses housekeeping is put to are even more surprising than its peculiar forms, though, for these are uses that go far beyond what one might think of as good housekeeping. Many of the tasks domestic labor performs in *The Professor's House* are in fact tasks more usually reserved for the historian. The wind and sun tidy up the mesa's cliff city, but in doing so they also keep it "preserved...like a fly in amber," making the lost civilization it embodies accessible centuries later (200). The "housekeeping" that Tom, Roddy, and Henry perform in the city continues this work, not only excavating but further guarding the city's objects, effectively turning them into artifacts. Finally, in the narrative framing "Tom Outland's Story," only St. Peter's jealously guarded rituals of domestic labor in arranging and maintaining his attic office enable him to transmit Tom's experience of the cliff city to the historical archive---and in the end, Tom's account is the only form in which the city will remain intact. But why would Willa @cather_professors_2002 make domestic labor underwrite the pursuit of historical knowledge? How do these peculiarly capacious forms of domesticity relate to the more traditional, heterosexist versions that are also represented in the novel? And in what ways does this hybrid of domestic and historical labor end up redefining both?

To understand domestic labor's relation to history as a discipline, we have to understand it as a simultaneous construction of space and of social forms. In many places in the novel, queering housekeeping becomes a way to narratively dissolve the heterosexist division of labor, but because of its dual nature it also becomes a means for constructing *spaces* that enforce alternatives to the dominant gender roles. Housekeeping and history-making are able to be combined because, in Cather's versions of them, they each trouble the separation of productive labor and domestic labor by their position in between the two. The productive nature of history is shown to rely on and concern itself with certain domestic paradigms, while those domestic paradigms are repurposed to become productive. The history-housekeeping hybrid, then, becomes a kind of work that disrupts the binary of work inside and outside of the home, a division that previous research suggests Cather found oppressive throughout her life.[^1] Finally, this understanding of the domestic elements of historical knowledge will allows a recontextualization of Tom's perplexing identification with the cliff city. Reading Tom's own alternative domesticity in relation to the traces he uncovers in the mesa reveals a form of historical knowledge based on transhistorical cultural identification, a form willfully ignorant of nation and genealogy.[^2] I will suggest that this identification is based on the recognition of a correspondence his own disruptive social form (the queer domestic arrangement with Roddy) in the spatial organization of the cliff city. If queer housekeeping is a way of producing new social forms that cause a rupture in the existing, heterosexist social landscape, the kind of history that results from it reclaims extinct social forms, reintroducing them to the present to cause the same kind of rupture. By combining housekeeping and history, Cather is looking to the past to find alternative structures with which to shape the future.

In pursuing these arguments, I will be using a methodology influenced by Caroline Levine's recent work in *Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network* to read common forms across multiple material manifestations. In this kind of "new formalism," divisions of labor, daily routines, social configurations and physical spaces are able to influence each other and carry forward developments from one arena in another. I will pick up Levine's contention that "One of the places where humans have some agency is in the orders that we ourselves impose" and that "paying attention to...formal patterns allows us to rethink the historical workings of political power and the relations between politics and aesthetics," and I will do so to read the "orders" imposed by housekeeping backwards to the intentions that give rise to them and forwards to the effects they have on other forms, narrative development, and material conditions (xii-xiii). Levine's new formalism provides a methodology uniquely suited to reading transformative domestic rituals. In the first place, the communicability of forms from physical structures to social structures would come as no surprise to some of the protofeminist domestic reformers I will discuss below, nor would the understanding that "gender binary is a form that can impose its order on the home" and other spaces of work (@levine_forms:_2015 13). But the rituals and spaces that define domestic labor also have a clear path of mutual material determination: domestic labor transforms a space, but space also has a limiting power on the forms that domestic labor can take and the extent of its reach. By the same token, reading historical spaces like the ruins of the cliff-city can reveal the domestic rituals and cultural forms with which they existed in dialectical interrelation. Tracing these interchanges creates a map of the construction of alternative social forms. It can also, as it does here, reveal a continuity between contesting dominant social forms through the creation of alternatives and historical resurrection of alternate, aborted trajectories of social development.

Before seeing how housekeeping does this unusual work in "Tom Outland's Story" specifically, though, a few questions will need to be answered about the status of housekeeping in Cather's life and work more generally and the historical status of domestic labor reform in the first decades of the twentieth century.

# Cather's Housekeeping

Why would housework be so important as to invade parts of the novel that seem to have no need of it? One possible, even inevitable answer is that housework is simply one of Cather's preoccupations, and that it finds its way into much of what she writes in some way or another, with the present case offering no exception. This response would certainly seem plausible given the two chapters Ann @romines_home_1992 devotes to Cather's housekeeping interest in *The Home Plot: Women, Writing & Domestic Ritual*. "Throughout her writing life," Romines argues, "Cather was engaged with the problem of domestic ritual....[It] was baggage she could never entirely abandon, for it was essentially a part of herself" (133). Such conflicted encounters with multiple forms of labor often arise in Cather's work as "encounters...when 'an original mind' wrestled with double loyalties to the life of the household, the stuff of home plots, and the impulse to run away, expressed in many canonical male escape plots" (135). M. Catherine @downs_becoming_1999 extends a version of this argument to Cather's journalism, suggesting that Cather's anxiety over "real" labor and domestic labor played out through the pen names under which she published her writing for periodicals and newspapers. As a writer and editor for *Home Monthly*, for example, she signed different (and differently gendered) names to write about topics covering the full range from what Romines calls "home plots" to "escape plots." Her anonymity allowed her to take up subjects mostly of interest to the groups with which she least wanted to identify, women whose labor was entirely domestic. To write for such a market, Downs suggests, Cather adopted "a deliberately 'feminine' voice…to elaborate feminine ideologies and obligations and for the first time perhaps, to create meaning from these for herself" (69). Even as someone else, though, she was far from comfortable with the restriction this topic implied. Though she would voice, pseudonymously as "Helen," some of these "feminine ideologies and obligations," she would also push against the boundaries of domesticity by imaginative projection---that is, by discussing literature: "By writing about adventure stories, Cather could write about the other world outside the home, worlds forbidden to proper Helens. Helen, although seated by her fireside, voyaged to foreign lands in the books she discussed" (@downs_becoming_1999 73). It is not difficult to see how such a common theme across several genres of her work would find its way into *The Professor's House* as well.

Housekeeping's prevalence across her other writing, however, merely *contextualizes* its specific function in *The Professor's House* without explaining what that function is or how domestic labor takes on a unique character in the novel. The peculiar housekeeping of Cather's novel only occurs after decades of thinking on the connection between housekeeping, space, and behavior in various types of activism, especially protofeminist reform movements. Although in many senses  the traditional structures of domestic labor were at their most embedded in everyday family life in America, they were also contested sites from the second half of the nineteenth century through the first decades of the twentieth, both for their own sake and as platforms from which to call for larger social change.[^6] Going at least as far back as Catherine Beecher's early housekeeping manual in 1841---which she expanded with help from her sister, Harriet Beecher Stowe---many women were writing to establish models of a new domestic labor, both in manuals like Beecher's and periodicals with primarily female readerships like the ones for which Cather would later write (@fryer_felicitous_1986 28). A few decades later in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Melusina Fay Peirce, lifelong domestic reformer and wife of Charles Sander Peirce, had begun organizing a domestic labor cooperative in which women would ultimately begin to demand economic remuneration for their housekeeping, a movement buttressed by Peirce's articles in the *Atlantic* (@fryer_felicitous_1986 36). This incorporation of domestic labor into the productive economy would ultimately be picked up in Charlotte Perkins Gilman's *Women and Economics* of 1898.[^a] 

Many of the writers, like Stowe, whom Hawthorne would notoriously refer to as "scribbling women" were scribbling their way out of a system of uncompensated labor by imagining new social structures, but they frequently did so by imagining new spaces. Judith @fryer_felicitous_1986 documents the history of this particular instantiation of the literary spatial imaginary, pointing out movements like Peirce's as well as more audacious attempts (Gilman's and those of Marie Stevens Howland) to construct massive cooperative housekeeping centers and kitchenless houses. Somewhere between a commune and a pay-by-the-month hotel, these structures imagined a life in which a female-male gender binary would no longer map onto a domestic-productive labor binary (Fryer 36-8). 

It is significant that communal economic models are the means by which these re-imaginings intervene in the gendered binary of labor, and it is also significant that these communal models are enabled by carefully designed space. These facts taken in tandem imply a continuum between gender, labor, space, and literature that invites careful reading of narrative constructions of the home as a site in which all of these factors come to be altered by the experimentally altering the same set of forms.

Domestic reform, then, was a movement that closely entwined writing with communal structures, gendered social forms, and the transformation of space; it is in the same vein that Cather uses housekeeping as a narrative mechanism to effect these alterations in *The Professor's House*.[^b] Causing her characters to engage in transformative domestic rituals, she dramatizes the way that transforming space can transform economic and social relationships. Domestic rituals, according to Ann @romines_home_1992, are "rituals performed in a house, a constructed shelter, which derive meaning from the protection and confinement a house can provide." Like most rituals, she argues via Orrin E. Klapp, they contain "symbolic value, emotional meaning and (usually) a 'dramatic' group-making quality" (12). Romines focuses on the preservative aspect of domestic rituals, and that will become important in reading Cather's use of domesticity below. But in addition to what she points out, it is essential to include the formative and transformative aspects of such rituals: domesticity includes routine maintenance, but it also includes more positive actions that determine the structures of the shelter and the system by which its resources are managed. These inclusions might be rephrased as design and economy. When it is able to be reimagined beyond the "protection and confinement" of the shelter through domestic reform schemes, domestic labor becomes a paradigm for constructing social, environmental, and economic structures. This is the sense in which Cather uses domestic labor as a narrative and social tool.

One has to be careful about seeming to align Cather with female domestic reformers of the period, though, because of her notoriously conflicted relationship with feminine identification. As has already been demonstrated in Downs's study of her journalism, Cather had to develop entirely new personalities to find a way to enter the discussions in which the domestic reformers dwelt by necessity. By "aligning herself with male critics and authors,...and by going to school, Cather gave herself a profession, removing herself" from an unproblematized feminine identity (@downs_becoming_1999 42). Queer reclamation of Cather has also been a conflicted task, though, however much it might seem to characterize this situation of exclusion. On one hand, as Marilee @lindemann_willa_1999 pointed out in 1999, theorists like Eve Sedgwick to Judith Butler have found useful material in Cather's work and critics like Larry Rubin and Judith Fetterley have "combed the novels and short stories for signs of how sexuality is translated into textuality, for evidence of lesbianism masked in order to evade detection and censure" (9). On the other hand, her queerness has been distinctly more contested in the years since. As Heather @love_feeling_2007 noted more recently (in 2007), "the problem of claiming Cather as 'one of ours'" has been a somewhat intractable one, because her hostility toward "public expressions of same-sex desire" and her own identity have caused her "de-queering" in scholarship and her contemporary reception (74).[^7] 

Whatever Cather's relationship is to protofeminism and queerness in terms of her own identity, the type of productivity she depicts in *The Professor's House* shares elements of both. She shares with the domestic reformers the conviction that transforming space can transform social structures, and she shares with queerness the creation of divergent social forms as a way of existing outside of and against a dominant structure of being.[^g] Both can be understood politically in terms enabled by Levine's work on forms. She argues that by reading the overlapping forms of dominant culture, which are both closer to the surface and more local than the structures of Marxist critique, new forms or new manipulations of existing forms can enable a more trenchant  model of resistance. In this view it is possible to choose which "forms...we wish to see governing social life" according to "which forms of protest or resistance actually succeed at dismantling unjust, entrenched arrangements" (16-8). It is precisely this type of political efficacy that Cather's treatment of housework and history shares with queerness and domestic reform. While an updated discussion of domestic labor might be a fruitful ground for reengaging the topic of queerness as such in Cather's work, combining the two to consider housework as a method of *queering* will allow me to understand domestic labor as a way of reformulating spatial and social forms at once. Transformative domestic rituals can then be seen as ways of constructing utopian[^c] spaces,[^8] a process that is as important in terms of environment, economics, and historiography as it is in terms of gender.

#Henry's Invisible Labor

Following Cather's lead, we can locate the most conceptually useful housekeeping in the least expected places. While the more recognizable domestic labor occurring in Godfrey St. Peter's home is important and would need to be discussed in any full analysis of housekeeping in general in the larger novel, it is the alternative forms of masculinized housekeeping in "Tom Outland's Story" that will be most useful in isolating the utopian kernel of historicist housekeeping. One housekeeper in particular sits at the center of this chapter, quietly making all the difference: Henry Atkins, the British expatriate who cooks, cleans, and gives Tom and Roddy access for the first time to a world in which they can find a place for themselves.

Henry has been subject to a peculiar silence in criticism of *The Professor's House*. Perhaps in part due to Eve Sedgwick's focus on Tom and Roddy as a "gorgeous" homosocial romance,[^3] the understanding of the "family" in the Tom Outland section has largely reinforced a binary family structure that makes it very difficult to account for "old Henry." Even though it is not until Henry's arrival that Tom and Roddy, "foundlings" both,[^5] become part of a "happy family," most commentary that talks about this familial identification at all talks over Henry's constitutive role in it. Heather Love focuses on the binary "male friendship" in the relationship between Tom and Godfrey St. Peter, and although she recognizes that both "Harry's [sic] death and Roddy's departure" cause the "end to Tom's period of male-male intimacy," these disruptions are subsumed by what she sees as a "love at last sight" between Tom and Roddy (75-86). Despite his interest in the family as it relates to citizenship and cultural antecedents, Walter Benn @michaels_vanishing_1990 touches on this three-part family only briefly as "one such model of America as 'a family matter'"---and this model shares a sentence with Louie Marsellus, who interests Michaels much more (234). 

The reasons for this critical indifference are clear, and for the same reasons putting increased emphasis on Henry here might seem to go against the grain of the narrative: he appears a minor character, and would seem to be at most ancillary to a plot much more interested in Tom, Roddy, and Godfrey St. Peter. That there is no clear need for Henry to appear, however, is all the more reason to read him carefully. If he is not advancing the plot, than he must fill some other, less obvious need. 

And indeed, he does: this British drifter who cooks, cleans, and decorates for Tom and Roddy is so invisible because his importance does not come into focus without an explicit emphasis on housekeeping, the means by which he unwittingly disrupts the binary preserved even by an intimate homosocial friendship. His role in the cabin's "happy family" causes an ambiguity in the neat division of domestic labor and productive labor by both reforming the domestic *space* of the cabin and the domestic routines and social arrangements of the other two men who inhabit it. By moving this family from a binary to a communal form, Henry also narratively enables the three-person family to access the mesa in which they find traces of a utopian, anti-binarist domesticity. It is a shift consistent with the kind of friendships that have been of great interest to recent queer theorists, allowing a reading of the cabin (with its cowboy housekeeping) and the cliff city (with its environmentally enforced communalism) as disruptive domestic spaces.

What readings of Henry and his place in the family do exist rightly point out that Henry, Tom, and Roddy transform a traditional, family-like social structure into a less familiar, but nevertheless stable, relationship. As Marilee @lindemann_willa_1999 points out, for example, it is both a "queering...of the American classic as the tale of a free boy's adventures" and an alternative to a heterosexual family: Tom, Roddy, and Henry "can make of themselves 'a happy family'...devising their own patterns of living, working, and caring for one another without interference from the other world below" (103). What this reading does not account for, however, is that the alternative to the heterosexual family that emerges is explicitly developed and maintained through the evolving structure of the men's domestic labor. Life in the cabin develops on a trajectory from a state of natural, disordered cleanliness to a state of *human*, domestic cleanliness. And as this shift in the space occurs, the social structure with which it is mutually constitutive becomes increasingly distinct from anything is recognizable in the dominant social order they came from. 

The type of domesticity with which they begin maps closely with masculinist adventure stories that Lindemann suggests Cather is queering, in that it recalls hackneyed tropes of a man or men in uneasy harmony with "nature"---a relationship at times contestatory, at times transcendent, but always manly. Cather's version of this trope, though, is filtered through the narrative construction of the home, and in her hands the porous man-nature boundary of the adventure genre becomes a porous *home*-nature boundary. When Tom and Roddy arrive, the landscape itself has already compromised any clear distinction of the out-of-doors from the home and family: "The grama grass grew right up to the door-step, and the rabbits were running about and the grasshoppers hitting the door.... There was no litter around, it was as clean as a prairie-dog's house" (187). The outside is trying to get inside; or rather, the outside is trying to *become* the inside. This home sheltered by the mesa establishes a liminal space between the familiar dichotomy of adventuring, nature and culture. As such, it has its own standards of domesticity, as in the peculiar cleanliness established by the intrusion of the natural. Gus Reynolds points out that this "shelter" where "the grass grows right up to the door" creates a "seamless connection with the terrain." This dwelling and many others from Cather's work---"Ivar's sod hut in *O Pioneers!*, the Shimerdas' dugout, Ántonia's fruit cave"---"accept the constraints of the environment and find an aesthetic emerging from the necessities of the landscape" (5). If they find an aesthetic in the landscape, it is an aesthetic that is partially enforced by the ordering of housekeeping: like the cliff city that has "wind and sun" for "house-keepers," the cabin is tidy and carefully ordered without being "clean" in a human, domestic sense. And although it cannot be taken as clean in the sense familiar to domestic standards, the comparison to a prairie-dog's house demands re-thinking of what it means to "make a home": just as the prairie-dog fashions its own home out of the earth, Tom and Roddy fashion their cabin out of a space whose naturalness Cather insists upon. 

This animalistic paradigm of space-construction maps, curiously, to one of the only occasions when the domestic arrangement is specifically gendered. To conclude the paragraph that defines the oscillation between home and landscape, Tom dubs the setting "the sort of place a man would like to stay in forever" (187). The masculine version of domesticity with which Cather begins in the Outland chapter---that is, a version still recognizable within a binary set of identities---is finally recognized as no kind of domesticity at all. Contemplating the cabin's crude "cook-stove," Tom looks forward yearningly "to cooking on an iron stove with four holes" (188). It is a wish that will not be possible in the space like this one that is so heavily defined by its liminality.

The relationship between the two men may be masculine and homosocial in terms of gender, but in its division of labor it remains distinctly heterosexist. That is, it does not disrupt the productive-domestic labor binary structurally, instead merely allowing fluidity in which partner is able to inhabit each role. More specifically, Tom and Roddy develop a system of alternation between the productive and the domestic: "One man was with the herd while the other got his sleep and did the cooking at the cabin. The mesa was our only neighbor, and the closer we got to it, the more tantalizing it was" (189). The men take turns as housekeeper and worker, and although the temporality of the bourgeois working day is disrupted, the roles that support it continue to exist as a binary. The monolithic mesa, humanized as a silent neighbor, stands over the gap where another person (or other people) would be. It is not immediately clear why this abrupt transition occurs to neighborlessness in general, however, or why the mesa is so "tantalizing." The turn can certainly, in part, be explained by the lack of any company but each other's and a longing for adventure, but it serves a different function narratively. It establishes negatively a third element that would, and will, break the frame of a binary social relationship, and its appearance at this moment anticipates the communal structures they will find in the mesa itself. 

Henry's sudden appearance fills the void that is exposed by the neighborly mesa, and by displacing the naturalistic housekeeping of the homosocial adventure tale, he interrupts the binary structure of the labor relationship and queers the entire domestic space. No longer is the cabin a "prairie-dog's house," but it is not a suburban living room, either. Instead, it becomes something entirely new:

> Life was a holiday for Blake and me after we got old Henry. He was a wonderful cook and a good housekeeper. He kept that cabin shining like a playhouse; used to dress it all out with piñon boughs, and trimmed the kitchen shelves with newspapers cut in fancy patterns. He had learned to make up cots when he was a hospital orderly, and he made our bunks feel like a Harvey House bed. To this day that's the best I can say for any bed. And he was such a polite, mannerly old boy; simple and kind as a child. I used to wonder how anybody so innocent and defenceless had managed to get along at all, to keep alive for nearly seventy years in as hard a world as this. Anybody could take advantage of him. (195)

The "holiday" of life with Henry is a state of exception from the normal capitalist social order. Similarly, the extent to which the cabin becomes a "playhouse" both disrupts the necessary endurance of masculine adventuring and the sense of the "home" as a space in dialectical relation with "work," establishing it as a third space that enables the ludic and the child-like to exist without trouble from the world beyond. This transformation of the social makeup of the space, furthermore, is explicitly rendered as a transformation of the space itself. What used to be a subsumption of domestic space by the natural out-of-doors now becomes a domestication of the natural, with the "piñon boughs" serving as decorations. With a domesticated natural world comes a distinct separation of the formerly ambiguous inside and outside. The "Harvey House bed" refers to a chain of railroad hotels founded by Frederick Henry Harvey, a hotelier whose efforts would earn him the epithet "civilizer of the West" (@kelley_harvey_2006); by invoking the Harvey House here, Cather invokes a prominent paradigm of "civilizing" and taming a previously untamed space. Spatial transformation leading from Henry's arrival in the family inaugurates a level of "civilized" comfort that overwrites the homosocial domestic space of the frontier. At the same time, he introduces a corresponding social paradigm of the "polite [and] mannerly," extending comfort to a set of behaviors. When the binary social structure is broken by the introduction of a third party, space and behavior shift accordingly. The continuum of social, behavioral, and spatial forms is established in this moment of their mutual determination.

The space is not a traditional domestic space, though, and neither is the family with which it is mutually constituted part of the dominant social order on which tradition relies. Henry's place in this revision of the family is partially that of the child (purely a beneficiary of productive labor and source of play) and partially of the wife (the uncompensated domestic laborer and manager of the home).[^d] Henry's labor is explicitly not able to be remunerated, according to the man who employs Tom and Roddy; instead he is fed and sheltered (194). When Tom and Roddy regret being unable to offer him a wage to continue working with them in the cliff dwellings, he happily joins them regardless (204). The paternalism of this setup is ambiguous, mirroring the structural position of the wife in the conditions of labor even as its apparent dependence and subordination to two superior roles make it more similar to the role of child. But through all this ambiguity, Henry remains defiantly masculine. Tom carefully points out that "He shaved every morning and was as clean as a pin" before saying, in the same breath, that "the three of us made a happy family" (196). The way family is established among the three of them is through Tom and Roddy's imaginative identification with Henry's lineage, a historical legacy to which neither of them has access or relation. When Henry discusses "his family, and the work they'd done, and the great age to which they lived, and the brandy puddings his mother made," Tom and Roddy can only "strain [their] imagination trying to visualize such a family dinner party" (204). The irony, of course, is that Henry has brought an alternative version of this family structure into the cabin, one in which Tom and Roddy are uniquely able to participate. The cognitive dissonance comes from their inability to overlay the new family structure in which they find themselves onto the years of tradition that Henry's former family manifests.

It is clear, then, that Henry changes more than the space and the labor structure: he makes a "family" out of the arrangement even though he seems in many ways to take Tom and Roddy further from the heterosexist, binary structure with which they began. Since this difference does not prevent them from being called a family, they must be in some way changing or expanding---perhaps disrupting---what is meant by "family" as Cather uses the term. 

It is essential for the queering of domestic labor that this new family not map neatly to the structure of a traditional family, as Cather's refusal to let it do so is her means of rupturing the labor binary. Henry's labor is domestic, but because the structure separating productive labor and domestic labor has been broken, his work is able to be imported into the productive sphere. When Tom and Roddy are finally able to begin excavating the cliff city in earnest, Henry comes with them as a collaborator without abandoning his status as a housekeeper. His inclusion in the productive labors of Tom and Roddy end up changing the nature of the work itself, as their amateur archaeology begins to take on the lexicon of domestic labor.

> We brought old Henry up by the new horse-trail and began housekeeping. We were now ready for what we called excavating....Henry, besides doing the housekeeping, was very eager to help us in the 'rew-ins,' as he called them. He was more patient than we, and would dig with his fingers half a day to get a pot out of a rubbish pile without breaking it. After all, the old man had a wider knowledge of the world than either of us, and it came in handy. (210)

The talents that make Henry a good housekeeper, which might become a rationale for his relegation to an unremunerated subordinate role, instead make him a uniquely valuable worker. The "patient" carefulness with which he removes artifacts from the "rubbish pile" becomes continuous with his "wider knowledge of the world." Even though Henry remains a somewhat deemphasized member of the group---always somewhat ancillary to what is understood to be the deeper partnership between Tom and Roddy---his domestic contributions take on a broader significance when the domestic sphere is no longer prevented from being considered productive.[^4] What was previously a revision only of the domestic sphere has now widened to become a reconception of the productive sphere.

The result of Henry's increasing importance is an increasingly communal model of friendship that displaces the binary homosocial relationship of Tom and Roddy that is the germ of the disruptive social form they will identify with in the cliff city. The progress toward a structure that less resembles the heterosexual marriage makes Henry's "happy family" the type of relationship that has been of interest to recent queer theorists like Heather Love, who in her discussion of Cather and *The Professor's House* taps into this "reactivated" concern with the "history and the philosophy of friendship" to read Tom's relationships with both Roddy and Godfrey St. Peter. From Foucault, she takes an understanding of "friendship as an alternative form of intimacy, a utopian space beyond the constraints of marriage and the family"; from Aristotle, a view of it "as an autonomous space, as free from the machinations of power as it is from the shocks of desire" (76-7). Throughout her reading, Love focuses on the autonomy and exceptional spaces that friendship enables, suggesting that it allows the creation of new social relationships while also serving a "stabilizing role...in imagining queer existence and queer community" (79). This simultaneous inventiveness and stability closely characterizes the structural innovation inaugurated by Henry's arrival at the cabin. Love goes on to trouble and introduce and loss into her understanding of the friendship between Tom and Roddy, but there is more to be exposed in the communal structures of the cabin and the mesa that their unique friendship enables---before, as Love persuasively demonstrates, it collapses into a form of loss. Before loss casts them back into a state of separation and "feeling backward," the quotidian domestic routines they establish as a threesome allow them to connect across time with corresponding forms in the cliff city.

#From Domesticity to Community

Henry introduces an element of community into the previously binary structure of Tom and Roddy's relationship, and as such it would seem fitting that his presence in the novel bookends the other two men's engagement with the cliff city. In fact, it is more than fitting: Henry's appearance narratively enables access to the mesa, while his death likewise enables access to the story of its civilization's demise. Furthermore, he allows Tom and Roddy to extend their domestic routines to the new kind of life and work they need to uncover the cliff city's secrets. As his domestic labor becomes also historical labor, Henry's function as a producer of new social forms is extended to the historical task. Where before spatial-social structures were constructed anew, now they are extracted from the spatial structures of the cliff city. By associating Henry with the excavation of the cliff city, Cather suggests the possibility of historical social forms as a vehicle for queer productivity. In other words, she suggests that examining archaic, ruined structures can form the basis of a rupture in the prevailing order when it is translated to social organization and behavior, and that producing new structures based on historical ones can create protected spaces in which to pursue alternatives to the cultural status quo.

As discussed above, before Henry arrives Tom and Roddy alternate manning the cabin and working the pastures. Under that arrangement, any exploration of the mesa is impossible, as either the cabin or the herd would remain unattended: either life or work would be destabilized in their pursuit of this alternative form of both. As soon as Henry has taken over the basic domestic maintenance work in the daily routines, though, there is always an extra man. It is this change in the situation, represented as well as caused by Henry, that allows Tom to establish a means of entering the cliff city. Henry's importance to the expedition is reinforced when the men transition from illicit to condoned explorations, quitting their jobs as cowboys and becoming full-time (if still amateur) archaeologists. Arranging a shoestring budget that their meager savings can cover, Tom concludes, "We thought we could manage to do the work ourselves if old Henry would stay with us" under his current working conditions (203). On one hand, this statement underscores the non-remunerative nature of Henry's work as a domestic laborer. On the other, it both brings him into the fold and reinforces the necessity of their new communal structure in accessing the ruins. "Old Henry" becomes a portal to the ruins and everything Tom and Roddy will discover in them. Similarly, his death marks a distinct turning point in the excavation narrative, although it nearly scuttles it by leaving Tom and Roddy "almost ready to quit" (215). Instead, Henry's death and burial triggers the appearance of Father Duchêne, whose knowledgeable speculation will lead them to another level of access to the cliff dwellers, a level that is deeper and more socio-historically oriented (215-20). Henry's death is narratively doubled by awareness of the "death" of the cliff-dwelling community, just as it also closely precedes the destruction of that community's traces by precipitating Tom's trip to Washington. It is possible to say quite literally that, in the narrative as it is set up, there is no possibility of Tom's identification with the cliff city without Henry and his housekeeping. 

Besides facilitating their literal access to the cliff city, the social form that Henry creates by joining their alternative family gives Tom a precedent according to which he is able to recognize the specifically domestic characteristics of the cliff dwellers, which become constitutive of that civilization as Cather establishes it. Mere pages after Cather lavishes detail on the setup of the cabin upon Tom's first arrival and the transformations Henry effects, she does the same thing to the cliff dwellers' homes. Where Tom previously stood over his cook-stove longing for a modern, iron one with four burners, now the men encounter ancient "clay ovens" with "charred bones and charcoal...thick with soot all the way along" (208). Cather draws careful, subtle attention to the specifically domestic nature of the passage in which these details emerge by linking the cliff dwellers' home with another home, recalling a shared object she sets up much earlier in the novel. Tom points out in an aside that he will eventually give one of the "beautifully shaped water jars" he finds here to Mrs. St. Peter, which he does because he wants it "to have a good home, among [her] nice things" (207, 118). Cather's trans-temporal identification of the two homes invites a comparison of the two as spaces that share a function in vastly different historical and social contexts, just as it highlights the difference between the two by the combination of proximity and stark divergences. Among the most striking, given the focus on the kitchen in domestic labor reform in the decades leading up to *The Professor's House*, is the presence of a communal kitchen: the room containing the oven "was evidently a kind of common kitchen, where they roasted and baked and probably gossiped" (208). Tom's recognition of this space is functional, but it also quickly becomes social. Recognizing a "common kitchen" similar to that of his own trio's domestic routines from the cabin, he is able to imaginatively project himself into the relational aspects of the cliff dwellers' daily routines and conversations. Elsewhere, similar moments of imaginative projection abound. Tom imagines how "the setting" would "have made it delightful to live there" just as it "made it delightful to work there," linking his own habitation with its previous occupants'; his mental reconstruction of the city goes as far as envisioning the processes of its construction (211). After several of these projections, the men essentially move in to the city itself, building a new cabin to replace their old one and establishing a direct route to the rest of the city. In a manner of speaking, they become members of this community that has been preserved outside of time. Where before the mesa itself was their only neighbor, they now have a community in absentia in the extinct fellow-inhabitants within the mesa.

The common kitchen and other traces disclose the structure of communal living Tom discovers in the cliff city. But just as important as the communality itself is the means by which he deduces it, as this process entails an extrapolation of social forms from the physical ones they leave in their wake. This deductive process reveals that the spatial form becomes an enduring and historically accessible instantiation of the social structures that engender it.

The most striking image that results from Tom's spatial-historical reading is the comparison of the cliff city to a nest of bees. It occurs twice: first to Tom as "a notion [that strikes him] like a rifle ball that this mesa had once been like a bee-hive; it was full of little cliff-hung villages, it had been the home of a powerful tribe, a particular civilization"; and second, more briefly, it is reiterated by Father Duchêne that the mesa was "honeycombed with habitations" (200-1, 219). Like the image of a "prairie-dog's home" that governs Tom's understanding of the cabin in its initial state, this image of a non-human spatial construction also implies an alternative understanding of the home. But the specific invocation of bees implies a structure of cooperation to achieve vastly more than any lone individual member could, and it also implies an imbrication of space with cooperative structures. Simply put, the beehive becomes an evocative image because its complexity is both enabled by cooperative structures and mirrors their shape in its close coordination of many discrete units that make up a larger whole. Perhaps for this reason, the beehive recurs in similarly utopian narratives of cooperative communities.[^9]

Unlike the prairie-dog metaphor, though, the vision of the city as a beehive is elaborated into a vision of highly intentional, communal self-fashioning that is simultaneously spatial and cultural. What makes the city so striking in Tom's perception of it is the clarity of its design principles. For example, in considering the distinctness of the tower that preoccupies him from the beginning, he says, 

>It seemed to me to mark a difference. I felt that only a strong and aspiring people would have built it, and a people with a feeling for design. That cluster of buildings, in its arch, with the dizzy drop into empty air from its doorways and the wall of cliff above, was as clear in my mind as a picture. By closing my eyes I could see it against the dark, like a magic-lantern slide. (202)

Here design becomes a link between spatial form and form as a mental phenomenon. The clarity of the forms that Tom describes lead ultimately to the enhanced clarity of his vision of it. In other words, the intentions of those who constructed the space translate directly into the observer's sense of the principles according to which the space was constructed. The communicative capacities of space establish a moment of Tom's strongest identification, suggesting that the identification is in some way connected to the cliff dwellers' "feeling for design." His extrapolations from the physical space to its form provide him in turn with a strong sense of the people responsible for both. 

Perhaps as a result of this identification, a clear valuation of design leads an anthropological, even ethnographic hierarchy of civilizations based on their capacity for domestic development. This turn in the representation of the cliff dwellers comes from the mouth of Father Duchêne, but it is so distinctly in line with what Tom has already observed about them and remains so unchallenged by the course of the rest of the narrative that it appears to achieve consensus among the characters. In this hierarchy, the communal character of the cliff dwellers is valuable primarily in the extent to which it leads to the alternative form of good housekeeping by which the cliff city has been characterized the whole time, and also of the kind that the men's alternative family has afforded them. To Father Duchêne, the tribe was "working out their destiny" by "making their mesa more and more worthy to be a home for man," and their success is marked by their ability to make a space that was "at once so safe and so comfortable" (210). While this process is not solely domestic (it includes religious and procreative values as well), Duchêne puts the emphasis on wringing a human-livable circumstance out of a challenging natural environment, almost establishing a history of domesticity itself. This is the same trajectory of domestic development that defines the progress from the binary of homosocial domesticity to the queer domesticity Henry establishes in the cabin. The shared hierarchy of values Duchêne uses to evaluate various tribes also describes Tom's domestic journey puts him in a continuum with the cliff dwellers and establishes a basis for the genealogy he will claim for himself later.

The stakes of Tom's yearning to identify with the cliff city---and, it might also be said, Cather's narrative construction of it---are higher than those of a simple preference. For Tom and Cather alike, an alternative domesticity closed off from the rest of the world and the dominant social order is a matter of self-preservation and the preservation of hope for a better world. David Harrell points out the extent to which "the ancient cliff dwellers represented for Cather an ideal society more stable and harmonious than her own," a basis for identification that could also describe Tom's reaction (32). Tom himself seems to enter a downward spiral when his alternative domestic bliss is interrupted, and his encounters with the more normative routines of life in Washington leave him embittered and distinctly alienated. For the cliff-dwellers themselves, the very conditions that shape their domestic rituals---existing in a closed system[^f] without interchange with or influence by the outside world---also protects them. It is repeated throughout that the preservation of the ruins suggests that they were never conquered by any other civilization.[^e] Duchêne's reading of the ruins ties their isolation to their ability to develop something entirely new, namely, new ways of determining their environment and culture: he says they "were cut off here without the influence of example or emulation, with no incentive but some natural yearning for order and security. They built themselves into this mesa and humanized it" (220). Isolation was a necessity if the mesa was going to be "humanized," implying that any "example or emulation" would take away from this humanizing capacity; humanization of the land can, of course, be glossed at domestication. When Tom's civilization does finally fall, it is assumed to be at the hands of the anti-domestic alternatives to this isolation and internal development:

>They were probably wiped out, utterly exterminated, by some roving Indian tribe without culture or domestic virtues, some horde that fell upon them in their summer camp and destroyed them for their hides and clothing and weapons, or from mere love of slaughter. (219) 

What is most remarkable about Father Duchêne's representation of their probable destruction is how entirely out of context is. No evidence of their destruction is available except their absence from the cliff city. While it is possible that Duchêne is speaking based on his opinion of the other tribes in the area, the vehemence of the description stands out from someone with very little background or characterization. And while it is reasonable to assume that any violent extermination would either be born out of a desire for goods and would otherwise be tantamount to "slaughter," it is far less clear why they should be "without culture or domestic virtues." This description leaves behind a sense of the outside world more characteristic of the historical norm subsuming the internally coherent and far superior alternative that had until then succeeded in developing itself independently. The alternative form that Tom, Henry, and Roddy invent in their explorations develops along similar lines, but more important is their revitalization of those forms, if not in practice then as structures of historical knowledge that their similar experience allows them to recognize. 

In the end, what does this "happy family" end up finding as a result of their historical housekeeping? Henry dies before they have time to continue developing their new domestic structure, and without him Tom and Roddy fall apart. None of Tom's plans for preserving the city pan out, and instead he's left with the proceeds of Roddy's unsanctioned transaction for the artifacts. In Tom's discontent, which appears to be the city's only legacy until his diary is recovered, it is possible to see an alternative futurity to the one he sees in the dominant historical trajectory. His family is cut short, but Tom has seen in the cliff city the community that would result from it on a larger scale. What he essentially loses is the safe space in which to develop a rupture to the default social trajectory of a world that has no place for him. Extrapolating this absence into its positive form---in other words, asking what it is that Tom yearns for---isolates a utopian ideal of a society built on different social foundations.

Finally, then, the basis for Tom's identification is less explicable by a genealogical connection than it is by an anti-procreative, transhistorical one that is, for an orphan whose life is determined primarily by what he has made for himself, only all the more authentic. This connection is predicated on a kind of communication that rises out of the shared human interaction with soil and space: "To people off alone, as we were, there is something stirring about finding evidences of human labour and care in the soil of an empty country. It comes to you as a sort of message, makes you feel differently about the ground you walk over every day." (192) He emphasizes the daily routines that are determined, as I have argued, from a base of domestic labor. Communications of historical social forms alter the experience of mundane life. Following Levine, such mundane resistance has the power to threaten the status quo in ways revolution has time and again failed to. And in Cather's hands, it all happens because of housekeeping.

***

Much about Cather's treatment of domestic labor is unique: the correlation of housekeeping to historical labor with which I began is so surprising precisely because it is unusual. The method of reading domestic labor and spatial alteration as constructions of social forms, however, is communicable to work in which domestic labor takes its more expected forms. It is one thing to read the structures of domestic labor when they make incursions into the main plot---the charwoman in *The House of Mirth* comes to mind as a character whose invisibility, while it lasts, is part of the point. There is a way to read the structures of daily life by the physical traces they leave, however, that Cather both models in Tom's response to the cliff dwellers and demands of her readers in her insistent references to housekeeping. A way of approaching history in search of long-abandoned domestic routines and extinct social structures can also be extrapolated from Tom's experience, especially with the help of Levine, whose transhistorical, repetitive iteration of forms creates the possibility for collapsing temporal divides. When Tom, Roddy, and Henry set up house among the cliff dwellers, they provide one suggestion of what it means to live within that kind of historical iteration of forms. With that possibility in mind, it becomes possible to revive, in everyday life, hypothetical alternative trajectories of social history: to ask what a modern communalism based on the cliff dwellers would look like, and what might have happened if they had not been wiped out and Tom really *were* their descendant.

The political efficacy of this kind of history depends on the extent to which a social form is realistically communicable and can create an alternative to the dominant social structures of the present. Not all social forms or ways of reviving them will be of any use (nobody is holding up historical recreations of colonial America for tourists as a utopian paradigm). But when historical traces are combined with imaginative projection, literature can become uniquely suitable for use as a certain kind of historical document. And literature like Cather's, which uses history and the material construction of space in combination to find an enclave protected from social determination, can be especially so.

[^1]: See M. Catherine Downs's discussion of her relationship to domestic labor in *Becoming Modern* (especially 35, 42, and 46).

[^2]: In this sense I agree with Walter Benn @michaels_vanishing_1990 in "The Vanishing American" when he suggests that Tom's identification with the cliff city relies on the impossibility of any biological inheritance (231-2). In general, however, my sense of the "family" in *The Professor's House* will have very little to do with the way Michaels discusses it, even though the readings do not necessarily conflict. 

[^3]: As @lindemann_willa_1999 mentions in a footnote, Eve @sedgwick_across_1989 discusses Tom Outland's story as explicitly homosocial (103 n. 38).

[^4]: This attempt to unite domestic labor and productive labor draws one more line of connection between Cather in *The Professor's House* and Charlotte Perkins: the incorporation of domestic-sphere activities into the productive division of labor is one of the main arguments spanning her *Women and Economics* and *The Home: Its Work and Influence* (@gilman_women_1966, @gilman_home:_2002).

[^5]: For more on Tom and Roddy as "foundlings," see Christopher @nealon_foundlings:_2001 in his chapter from *Foundlings: Lesbian and Gay Historical Emotion Before Stonewall*.

[^6]: See @fryer_felicitous_1986, especially her introduction. The efforts of Beecher's generation culminate only in further spatial crackdowns: "exactly as women moved increasingly outside the home---becoming the cause of social disorder---the *model* home became a rigid construct imposed on a social situation as a means of establishing order and control, suggesting by the ordering of spaces that could be endlessly duplicated particular values, particular norms concerning family life, sex roles, community relations and social equality" (28). 

[^7]: I defer here to Heather Love's excellent contemporary overview of the scholarship on queerness in Cather's life and work (72-5, 178n.3).

[^8]: Without, or at least prior and in addition to, the loss on which Love's argument is predicated.

[^9]: The most obvious example is Gilman's "Bee Wise" from 1913 (@gilman_bee_2009).

[^b]: [Hi Austin! This is the historical sleight-of-hand by which I'm concealing (and now revealing) the fact that I can't yet prove a connection between Cather and the domestic reform. This is the kind of heavy-duty research for which I kind of think I'd need to go to Nebraska if this is going to turn into an article or a chapter.]

[^c]: [I'm using "utopian" here in a sense that I need more time to theorize. Basically, I think of it as precisely what I'm pursuing here: the simultaneous construction of spatial and social structures. When this process happens in careful balance with the natural environment and resource distribution (economy), it's what I eventually want to name "ecotopian."]

[^d]: David @harrell_mesa_1992 describes the relative roles of the probable source for such familial exploration units as Tom, Roddy and Henry as "three members on a more or less equal footing, a sort of fraternal unit rather than a conventional family of parents and children" (67). Attention to domestic labor and the "happy family" that is *created* in contradistinction to the heterosexual family demands a complication of the "fraternal unit" as the only viable alternative.

[^e]: This is one of many links between the isolated dwellings of *The Professor's House* and the cliff-top city of *Death Comes for the Archbishop*: "quote".

[^f]: [The "closed system" is also a utopian fiction paradigm (via Frederic Jameson) that I'll want to extend into the environmental/economic spheres for my thinking on ecotopias.]

[^g]: See for example Foucault's argument that "homosexuality threatens people as a 'way of life' rather than as a way of having sex" in "Friendship as a Way of Life" (qtd. in @halberstam_queer_2005 1). Thinking of Cather as "queering" rather than necessarily identifying as queer herself allows her to be read in terms of how she establishes threatening ways of life without having to read against her resistance to a queer identity.

[^a]: Gilman is another writer for whom domestic reform would express itself in utopian fictional forms. Jennifer @fleissner_women_2004 ties the "hyperproductive" tendencies that result from "trying to master a fundamentally unmasterable environment" in the home to Gilman's well known story "The Yellow Wallpaper" (75). This neurotic hyperproductivity, she argues, eventually leads to a utopian "solution" in *Herland* (95). 
