---
author: Phillip Polefrone
title: Global Circulation and Materialism in *Through the Arc of the Rainforest*
date: November 9, 2014
---

 Three main types of circulation occur: circulation of people, whether individual characters or unnamed masses; market circulation of commodities and services; and the circulation of non-commodity materials, including the Matacão, Kazumasa's ball, and Chico Paco's shrine. Within all these types of circulation, however, a distinction is maintained between the global and the local. Put broadly, Yamashita associates global circulation with market logics and against materiality, while local circulation within visible social networks is associated *with* materiality. The global market's anti-materialism is expressed in several ways. First, people themselves enter into market-like circulation, de-territorializing them and incorporating them into the "space of flows" (Bauman)---in this way, rootedness becomes a form of materiality. In terms of market itself, which in material terms can be understood in terms of Marx's dual nature of the commodity (use and exchange), circulation through exchange so dominates the representation of commodities that their material side, their thingness, actually disappears; the GGG corporation becomes a cypher for the domination of material use by immaterial exchange, for it is a company whose sole purpose is movement despite having no actual product. Finally, the crisis-prone nature of the immaterial marketplace is rendered within a material-focused ecological framework: in a mutually contingent cycle, global circulation of commodities disrupts natural material interchanges and "soil energetics" by generating the Matacão, even though it is ultimately held in check by bacteria and other natural agents that destroy the conditions of commodity circulation. The novel finally suggests that a non-crisis-prone ecological conception of global capital is impossible, in that the attempt to close the material circuit of production---to make the wasteful outputs of consumption the constituent inputs of production---leads to the system's implosion. These collisions of types of circulation sum to an ethics of materiality in which stable social, natural, and economic structure can exist only in proportion to their attentiveness to material flows.

I envision this paper taking three parts. First, I will pursue an account of the novel's types of circulation in terms of space and time, integrating visual mapping and textual analysis. The maps' lines of circulation will represent three dimensions: the type, represented by color; the location, represented by the lines themselves and their directional arrows; and the velocity or temporality of circulation, represented by the thickness ("weighting") of the lines. My suspicion is that such a visualization of flows will reveal a relationship between the circulation of characters, capital, and different types of materials. In the second section, I will put these types of circulation into context of some contemporary theorists of space, exchange, and materialism. These theorists may include Zygmunt Bauman, David Harvey, John Bellamy Foster/ Moore, and Bill Brown, and by incorporating some of them I hope to show that Yamashita's rendering of *things* and her way of narrating different types of material is determined by her narration of global flows. In the final section, I will ask how Yamashita's naturalization or ecologization of the market through the dual representaiton of circulation and things constitutes a materialist ethics. 
