---
author: Phillip Polefrone
title: Global Circulation and Materiality in *Through the Arc of the Rain Forest*
date: December 3, 2014
coursename: Postcolonial Ecologies
profname: Professor Wenzel
---

Before beginning, I'd like to contextualize exactly what this presentation is in relation to the paper that will result from it, and what I hope to achieve by presenting it. The project I'm working on essentially has two major components in terms of the work that will go into it. I want to talk about the way that circulation of materials and commodities, and more specifically the scale and type of circulation, affects the depiction of material in general in *Through the Arc of the Rain Forest*. This requires the kind of work that usually goes into literary analysis: a fair amount of focused close-reading to trace the way that material depictions change over the course of the novel combined with engagement with some of the theorists we've read over the course of the semester, including Bill Brown and Zygmunt Bauman. Alongside this work, though, I want to also do another kind of work, which is what I'll be presenting today: mapping. As I read Yamashita's novel the first time, and especially as I reread it to flag passages, character movements, and quotations, I realized that it is almost impossible to make sense of it without keeping a mental map of which characters were where, and which of the other characters they're with. The reading experience of the novel is, I think, such a strange one in part because of the difficulty of keeping this map straight. But on a higher level, the work the novel is doing, and the sophisticated relation I see it making between globalization and materiality, relies on this sense of increasing scope and multiple, coexisting temporalities. Therefore, in both this presentation and the paper, much of the argument will be run through a visual, spatial representation of the novel as a drama of network expansion, both for communicative reasons---explaining the novel would take longer than showing the use of space that underlies it---and for analytic reasons as well.

Finally, there is a methodological question underlying this effort that is of interest to me and which I might like to address, using this paper as a starting point, in another, future paper. That question is: What would a digital environmental humanities look like? Mapping is an obvious first step. More and more geospatial data is being gathered and analyzed as a way of approaching issues in environmental studies more broadly. At the same time, the Digital Humanities and the Environmental Humanities are coming into their own, and definitional questions are still being widely posed for each. Generally speaking, I work in both fields, and at some point, I need to start thinking about how to make them work together. This admittedly modest exploration, then, is a first step in that direction.

I'd love if this context could guide the feedback to what I'm about to present. So with that, I'll get to it.

#Introdution: Space, Things, Material

In Zygmunt Bauman's "Living (Occasionally Dying) in an Urban World," he presents a conception of space that is new, that has emerged with---and may be coextensive with---globalization and global capitalism. He defines his "the space of flows" as the spatial dimension "where global powers reside and operate," in which "it is the *speed of movement and facility to escape*, not the size of *territorial possessions* (and so responsibilities), that count and decide.… New empires are not of this world---not of earthly, geographical world, not of the 'space of places'" (112). Although his focus here is primarily on territoriality itself, his "space of flows" can also provide a way to discuss materiality in terms both of spatial understanding, and in the context of a global market. Is the international object, which is built in one place specifically to be shipped to and used in another, the same as the object used by the person who builds it, primarily where it was built? If territorial possession is anathema to global power, what about the possessions that define the territory? In Bauman's primarily geographical account of the space of flows, a more fundamental view of power and materiality remains unstated, but is nevertheless constitutive. Namely, that global power is greater the less it is constrained by materiality. Put another way: power can increase to a global scale only to the extent that it can operate independently of material limitations. 

Karen Tei Yamashita's *Through the Arc of the Rainforest* can be read as a surreal, comedic, but nonetheless sophisticated case study in a very similar principle. The relationship of global power and global capitalism to space is mirrored in the treatment of *things* that results from it. Narratively, these relationships express themselves in several ways. As you might expect, movement is represented directly as characters respond to various circumstances personal, spiritual, or profit-driven. But other kinds of movement also exist in the novel that allow characters to remain essentially stationary but move *in absentia*, that is, through the circulation of commodities. It's through circulation of this kind that Yamashita's Bauman-esque view of territoriality comes into contact with her treatment of material *things*: the drive to scale up power and influence, a drive that is often external to the characters' own motivations and wishes, causes them to lose sight of *things* as fundamentally material entities. Instead, they begin to understand *things* in terms of exchange, movement, and *networks* of circulation. At the same time, this revised view of material objects is accompanied by a kind of push-back by everything that is lost when the material substratum of exchange is ignored. The Matacão, almost a character itself, is the most obvious example: it's an underground, impenetrable mass of congealed plastic with magnetic, magical, and eventually disease-causing properties, and it results from waste-production only possible through a similar ignorance of the material essence of objects, except on a massive scale. Elsewhere, materiality is associated with more basic (and implicitly more valued) social relationships as well, which express themselves in the pain of their loss when the immaterial obsession has finally run its course. This continual back-and-forth---with market forces dematerializing everything on one hand and the material, natural basis of *things* reasserting itself in various ways in response---boils down to an ethical stance on the novel's part, which privileges attention to materiality over the immateriality of circulation on a global scale.

This is not a novel about things on their own, though, and the circulation of things can be obscured by the circulation of *people*, which predictably garners more focus. In fact, the circulation of things and people are more difficult to keep separate than in a less imaginative novel. It is the way objects and people interact in a non-market sense that ultimately mediates the way people interact with markets: and thus, how they interact with global circulation networks and power. From the opening paragraph, the boundary between thing and person is destabilized through the many object-appendages that come close to defining the characters. Kazumasa has a ball floating in front of his forehead that is made out of a plastic-like material, probably the stuff of the Matacão, which falls from the sky and attaches itself to him permanently. Kazumasa's ball gives him a job when it starts to detect weaknesses in railroad tracks, and as a result it also puts *him* in motion, eventually giving him the key to detecting Matacão and a massive source of global wealth. Chico Paco's pilgrimages derive from a non-objectified spirituality, but when this spirituality is objectified as an altar he becomes famous, finally coming into his own as a radio star and extending his influence through a network of constantly moving pilgrims.  Mané Pena, who lives on top of the Matacão and initially unearths it, has a "magic" feather for his part, though the only thing magical about it seems to be its ability to relieve stress when rubbed behind the ear. His fixation on these objects leads to his definition according to them: he becomes a world-famous doctor of "featherology" and gets drawn into the global trade of feathers for medicinal and recreational use. Batista and Tania Aparecida train a remarkable bunch of pigeons that lift them out of routine and lead them to founding a global communication network, but the pigeons serve as a kind of extension of Batista from the moment he finds it. Such appendages do not have to be objects, then: nevertheless, materiality is associated with the plant an animal world, and so they fall on the "non-market" side of the ethics I'm arguing Yamashita is establishing in this novel. Finally, and most literally, J. B. Tweep's supplementary appendage is his third arm, which enhances his manual abilities like typing and organizing, an advantage that becomes generalized into success in business through a philosophy of threes he calls "trialectics." Each of these extensions of self eventually becomes monetized, even though each of them begins as a constitutive element of the person to whom it is attached, or who fixates on it. With the monetization the object and its owner enter the stream of circulation.  This is the sense in which commodity circulation becomes a means of extending the scale one's movement and, in a sense, extending the limits of the self: when the commodity enters circulation, so does the character. 

At first glance, this view of the circulation of commodities, as though circulation can exist without the underlying object, seems counter-intuitive, fantastic, even in ways that go beyond the counter-intuitive fantasizing of the novel. This view would be incorrect in two senses, though. First, the novel itself provides a model for understanding circulation *in itself*, that is, without needing something to circulate. GGG, the corporation founded by Georgia and Geoffrey Gamble that finances J. B. Tweep's large-scale harvesting of Matacão, exists solely on the basis of this kind of circulation, and provides the model by which it can be understood. Like the novel itself, GGG is a kind of terrarium containing constant motion. Its workers are constantly rushing around smoking, yelling at each other, moving things from room to room, and copying documents that refer to nothing. This activity differs from business-as-usual in one important sense: it produces nothing; it has no object. Several times in the J. B. Tweep sections of the novel, a great plan or realization is mentioned on the basis of which the Gambles started their business, but it is never clear entirely what it is. After being sacked by the shareholders, they destroy a small "card" that appears to be the object at the center of the business, or at least some regulating mechanism. Twice it is referred to as a "microchip," but this is the same as making it a non-thing: an unspecified microchip is scarcely an object in itself, more a symbol of the immateriality of the virtual. The important point is that this object, though it is at the center of GGG, is entirely inessential to it. Nobody but Georgia and Geoffrey even know about it, and everything continues without it. The genius of GGG's founders lies, at bottom, in this unnecessary central symbol. It is understanding precisely that the object itself is eminently unimportant in relation to the conditions of its exchange, hence the ability of the company to "probably go on almost forever without" the "missing product" that Georgia and Geoff Gamble destroy on their way out of the firm (21). Because they've invented a company that does not even have to pretend to create something with use-value, a parade of cloned, identical functionaries photocopying their resumes is sufficient to the its continuation. GGG's circulation without production is not just the model for the kind of commodity circulation GGG is responsible for. It is the model for all the circulation of objects that takes place in *Through the Arc of the Rainforest*. 

The second reason it makes sense to talk about circulation in the absence of, and even destroying, the object that is circulated requires a turn to Marx's view of the commodity and Bill Brown's extension of it in his "Thing Theory," the latter of which I won't be able to bring in until the larger paper. The dematerialization of the commodity can be understood in terms of the division between use-value and exchange-value with which Marx begins the first volume of *Capital*. Most basically and very reductively, use-value is the value of the thing as an object, what it is good for to those who *use* it; exchange-value, on the other hand, is a comparative relation of value through trade. This second value appears to be an inherent value to the object itself, when in fact it is anything but. Without belaboring the details, this separation of material utility and immaterial exchange is very useful for thinking through the model of circulation established in the GGG passages and, through those, the way circulation of trade goes global in general---both in the novel and in the world. Financialization is one of the mechanisms of globalization of capital, and essentially just means separating exchange-value from use-value through profitable circulation. We might think of commodities traders, swapping bundled of commodities without realizing what they're swapping is two parts frozen orange juice and three parts cattle futures, neither of which they deal with directly: to say that circulation depends on an object in this case would come as quite a surprise to those profiting from circulation without much consideration of its material use. In GGG's case, the card containing the totality of the company's product becomes a symbol of this loss of the material side of exchange, and in becoming so it provides the key to understanding the way the many monetized objects, and the people they represent, work in the novel. Each of these objects is practically meaningless in itself, like the feathers that are spread around the globe before being made synthetically. But the social structures and value systems that inhere in each makes each sufficient to its own form of circulation---value systems like feather addiction (comparisons to tobacco appear throughout), religion, or communication are the masks by which this profit-driven deemphasis of the material thing is concealed. Consistent with commodity logic, the material aspects of the thing are overlooked in favor of exchange value and, through it, social value. To quote a more famous passage from Marx, under capitalism---and we should specify, especially global, financial capitalism---"All that is solid melts into air."

#Narrative Structure and the Expansion of Circulation Networks

