---
author: Phillip Polefrone
title: Global Circulation and Materiality in *Through the Arc of the Rain Forest*
date: December 3, 2014
coursename: Postcolonial Ecologies
profname: Professor Wenzel
---

Before beginning, I'd like to contextualize exactly what this presentation is in relation to the paper that will result from it.  In the full paper, want to talk about the way that circulation of commodities, people, and things influences the depiction of material in general in Karen Tei Yamashita's *Through the Arc of the Rain Forest*, and how these relationships come down to a statement that global markets and environment are necessarily opposed. What I'm presenting today is a few excerpts woven into a presentation, but it is also a presentation of another kind of work: mapping. I've chosen to visualize the spatial aspects of the novel in part for communicative reasons---explaining it to a different audience, one that had never read it, would take longer than visually presenting the novel's use of space. In more analytic terms, though, by visually representing the novel in this way, I hope to show the failure of place narrowly understood in accounting for the novel. In other words, that the characters have to be understood as not just individuals, but also the objects that they put into circulation, or that put *them* into circulation, or that otherwise extend the boundaries of the individual in some way. This vision of prosthetic humanity that the novel puts forward, I'll argue, is the only way to reconcile the coincidence of economic-slash-environmental calamity with the resolution on the human narrative.

First I'm going to address some of the theoretical basis for what I'm looking at and how I see it playing out in the novel broadly. Then, I'm going to go into more detail with a brief excerpt from my analysis of Kazumasa's early sections before outlining some other arguments in more detail. Finally, I'll display some of the maps that go beyond the Kazumasa sections.

#Space, Material, Things

In Zygmunt Bauman's "Living (Occasionally Dying) in an Urban World," he presents a conception of space that is new, that has emerged with---and may be coextensive with---globalization and global capitalism. He defines his "space of flows" **Slide** as the spatial dimension "where global powers reside and operate," in which 

>it is the *speed of movement and facility to escape*, not the size of *territorial possessions* (and so responsibilities), that count and decide.… New empires are not of this world---not of earthly, geographical world, not of the "space of places." (112)

Although his focus here is primarily on territoriality itself, his "space of flows" can also provide a way to discuss materiality in terms both of spatial understanding, and in the context of a global market. Is the international object, which is built in one place specifically to be shipped to and used in another, the same as the object used by the person who builds it, and which is used primarily where it was built? If territorial possession is anathema to global power, what about the possessions that define the territory? In Bauman's primarily geographical account of the space of flows, a more fundamental view of power and materiality remains unstated, but is nevertheless constitutive. Namely, that global power is greater the less it is constrained by individual materiality. Put another way: power can increase to a global scale only to the extent that it can operate without material limitations. 

Karen Tei Yamashita's *Through the Arc of the Rainforest* can be read as a surreal, comedic, but nonetheless sophisticated case study in a very similar principle. The relationship of global power and global capitalism to space is mirrored in the novel's treatment of *things*. Narratively, these relationships express themselves in several ways. As you might expect, movement of characters in the usual sense occurs in the normal course of narration, which in this case follows a trend of centralization. But another kind of movement also exist in the novel. Especially in later sections, characters themselves move *in absentia*---through the circulation of commodities. In this kind of circulation, Yamashita's Bauman-esque view of territoriality is expressed in her treatment of material *things*. The characters begin to understand *things* primarily in terms of exchange, movement, and *networks* of circulation. At the same time, this immaterial view of objects is accompanied by a kind of push-back from everything that is lost when the material substratum of exchange is ignored. The Matacão, almost a character itself, is the most obvious example: it's an underground, impenetrable mass of congealed plastic, with either magnetic or magical properties. It results from the kind of waste-production that's only possible when you're ignoring (on a massive scale) the material basis of consumption. Elsewhere in the novel, materiality is associated with more basic, and implicitly more valued, social relationships. These relationships are most visible when they're lost, when the immaterial obsession has finally run its course. This continual back-and-forth---with market forces dematerializing everything on one hand and the material, natural basis of *things* reasserting itself in response---it boils down to an ethical stance on the novel's part, a stance that privileges *attention to materiality* over the immateriality that comes with global circulation.

This is not a novel about *things* on their own, though, and the circulation of things can be obscured by the circulation of *people*, which predictably garners more focus. In fact, the circulations of things and people are more difficult to keep separate than they would be in the case of a less imaginative novel. The relationship between the two can be defined pretty much as follows: interaction of objects and people in a non-market sense often takes the form of something like prosthesis, and the prosthetic objects mediate the way people interact with markets, global circulation networks, and the power that comes with both. In Kazumasa's case, to which I'll turn now, this sense of prosthesis is particularly strong---and explicitly tied to labor.

#Kazumasa: Objectified Labor and Human Circulation

As I said, for the purposes of this presentation, I'll be focusing on the example of Kazumasa and the ball forever floating in front of his forehead. A great deal of emphasis is placed, from the beginning, on the ball's material: it is made out of a plastic-like material, something similar to (or at least that reacts to) the stuff of the Matacão. Almost as much attention is given to how it comes to define Kazumasa. Although it's fallen from the sky, it's attached itself to him permanently, so permanently that, by implication, the only way to take it from him is by killing him. It is not until Kazumasa grows up---enters the labor force, we might say---that his object-appendage begins to mediate his movement and economic relationships. When he does enter the labor force, his ball gets him a job specifically *because of its material peculiarity*. And because it starts to be attracted to weaknesses in railroad tracks, its peculiar nature also puts *Kazumasa* in motion. The effects of this prosthetic object are visible in the expanding size of Kazumasa's sphere of influence. The beginning of his life is narrowly confined to a scale consistent with the powers of his unaugmented body. 
**Slide**
The moment his abilities are extended by the object that is augmenting him---the moment in which the ball becomes a prosthetic---the extent of his influence expands. 
**Slide**
The geographic boundaries of his movement are carefully delineated to emphasize this increase: it is made very clear that he is traveling from Hokkaido, the northernmost portion of Japan, to Nagasaki, which is located in the south. 

But is Kazumasa put into motion or put into circulation? Now is a moment for some definitions. Circulation in the sense I'm using it here relies on exchange, and more specifically the exchange of commodities. And of course when I say commodity I mean specifically an object that is a product of labor and that is both used and exchanged. Kazumasa's ball is not a product of labor, nor is it exchanged, and therefore the *ball* is not a commodity in itself. But something else is happening here in terms of the changing materiality of Kazumasa's self as a result of his prosthesis. The ball is his only way of performing the labor by which he supports himself, because it is the part of him that responds to the track weaknesses. In a sense unique to the novel, then, Kazumasa's labor power is externalized---objectified in the ball. Though the ball may not be a commodity in itself, it is, in part, a way of physicalizing Kazumasa's commodified labor power. 

I should pause to make clear that I'm not suggesting a reductive, allegorical reading of the ball as only (and entirely) commodified labor. (Lest we forget, the ball is also the narrator of the novel.) I'm just arguing that it acts as such in the way it mediates Kazumasa's economic relations. In other contexts, the ball defines his identity---at certain points he is just "The Japanese with the ball." Also, it speaks for him more than he speaks for himself. So although it's important not to overstate this reading, the place of the ball in between Kazumasa and the market is clear.

Understanding Kazumasa's ball as his labor power externalized can also add some useful context to the conditions of his increasing obsolescence as a railroad maintainer, especially as this obsolescence relates to the extent of his sphere of influence. It's significant that, when Kazumasa eventually loses his position with the railroad company, it is because a new, bigger company has taken over that *replicates his ball exactly* with a *mechanical device* that looks suspiciously like his ball (8). With the ball understood as externalized labor power, the one-for-one replacement of human labor by its mechanical equivalent is imagined as the mechanical reproduction of an object. The result of this replacement is a decrease in the geographical extent of Kazumasa's influence. He is fired, which results "a considerable cut in pay" and a major curtailment of the distance he travels per day (8). 
**Slide**
In the first place, a relationship is established here that persists throughout: geographic influence correlates with economic power, as seen here in that fact that a diminution of distance covered per day leads to a wage cut. But the mechanization of Kazumasa's ball has a further-reaching effect on Kazumasa. Just as his ball enters a larger system of essentially mechanical objects, Kazumasa himself becomes, to some extent, mechanical. His circulation in the new system has a strict, regulated period, and the task has all the mindless repetition so characteristic of work within an extensive division of labor. A similar diminution of Kazumasa as an individual occurs later, when the ball has again been mass-produced, but this time as a fashion accessory (148). In both cases, the characteristics of the ball's circulation in a larger system of objects determines the character of Kazumasa's own interaction with larger systems. This is true whether those systems are economic, cultural, or social. It is no surprise that Kazumasa's diminishing status causes him to flee Japan for another locale: São Paulo. 
**Slide** To change the role of his defining object is to change the way he himself fits into the systems of which he is a part.

#Still to Come

Kazumasa is an isolated case, and there's more to say about it. But now I'd like to briefly outline what I plan to say about the rest of the characters in the full paper. In Kazumasa's case, the prosthetic object mediates his interaction with market situations but remains attached to him. In the longer paper, I will argue that the peculiar objects of many of the other characters extend their boundaries beyond their individual selves. Some of these boundaries are extended through trade: Mané Pena's feathers work as normal commodities; Chico Paco's pilgrimages lead to his extension through a pilgrim network and a radio show; Batista and Tania's pigeon communication network goes international; and J. B. Tweep's third arm, in a somewhat complicated swap of symbols, propels him to the head of the GGG Corporation and therefore makes him coextensive with the company's activity. Some of these extensions will be visible in the maps to come. In each case, though, a radical extension of the self corresponds with the decreasing emphasis on materiality. And finally, when each of these narratives crescendo simultaneously, over-extension of self comes with the destruction of the objects at their center. One image will become central to these arguments: the GGG corporation's endless circulation despite having lost its object of production, the destroyed "card" or "microchip" that is both central to the company and entirely unnecessary to its continuation. Such a company that needs to keep moving but doesn't have to *make* anything becomes a defining image of the relationship between global capitalism and material *things* throughout the novel. 

The way this all finally gets environmental---and I realize it's kind of a long walk, but it *is* where I'm getting to---is when GGG tries to turn the dematerializing power of globalization onto its own waste product, the Matacão. A self-digesting, or self-recycling capitalism is implicitly posited when commodities---*any* types of commodity---start to be made out of Matacão plastic. It is in theory a solution within capitalism to the negative externalities of globalization: instead of the Matacão's migration to "virgin" territories, which stands in for trash dumping in impoverished parts of the world, production can just eat its own tail and turn waste into product. The novel's renunciation of this solution is spectacular as the world is engulfed in plague and flames. Finally, all the "development" of the early sections is undone in the "return," but only after widespread (if cartoonish) violence. The note the novel ends on *is* the destruction of congealed waste matter, but it comes after the global market that has been established throughout...collapses---and collapses naturally. A naturalized version of market crisis, then, is in a certain sense considered ecologically, in terms of its give-and-take with natural material interchange. But the market finally is unable to find a steady state and is rejected by the natural system.

#Maps: Narrative Structure and the Expansion of Circulation Networks

Here are some of the maps:

**Batista and Tania's pigeon network**
These are the city limits of São Paulo, with all the public transportation lines marked in black. In the center is the beginning of the pigeon network, starting with a single pigeon that is injured on the sidewalk.

**A single pigeon increases the scale**
When Tania tries to get rid of the pigeon, she only inadvertently increases its range and kicks off the expansion of the pigeon network. At this point the pigeons establish a circuit of their own.

**Pigeon network exceeds São Paulo**
The pigeon goes farther.

**Chico Paco's first pilgrimage**
About the same time, Chico Paco begins the pilgrimage to establish an altar to St. George on the Matacão. This is an example of individual movement rather than a circuit, until...

**Trip becomes circuit**
...a circuit to São Paulo is established in Part II. Nevertheless, the beginning of the pattern of pilgrimages and returns establishes a kind of one-person circulation of prayer. This is especially so because his individual circulation is motivated by a larger network of communication and requests.

**Pigeon Networks cover a whole region, get funding**
**read quote** The funding here is important, as is the "test flight": this is not only no longer a one-pigeon operation, it is no longer a two-person operation. The increase in scale is now in two dimensions, between range and number of agents. Its increase will only, of course, continue. Moving into Part II involves an change in type as well as extent for both Chico Paco and Batista & Tania.

**All networks through part II**
Here are all the networks as of part two. Note that the setting has stopped being individual, atomized towns, and has started being regions of Brazil. In Part II, we have moved from the local to the regional. 

**Global networks, initially**
Moving from Part II: The Developing World to Part III: More Development is a matter of moving from the regional to the national and, in the case of GGG, the international. Here is how things look when they begin, with GGG bound to productless circulation and containment and Batista and Tania limited to a single injured pigeon. But here...

**Global networks, after**
Is what happens when other forces come into play. For GGG, it is the subsumption of Mané Pena's feather business and their development into commodities on top of the massive flow of capital to transform the Matacão into a base of operations. The Pigeon network now covers a majority of the country, and on top of that has enough pigeons to necessitate a truck. It has entered the public consciousness.

**Pigeon and pilgrim networks combine**
The pigeon network is now also combined with Chico Paco's emerging votive circuit, as Batista is accompanying Chico Paco in a truck. With Part IV: Loss of Innocence, networks start combining or being centralized into larger units, multiplying the scale of all of them.

**Networks go international**
But above all, the Loss of Innocence is characterized by the transgression of or extension to the limits of national borders. The Pigeon network surpasses GGG's network. Chico Paco's one-person pious mission is expanded into a many-person votive network of constant motion, with volunteers making pilgrimages all over the country.

**Centralization**
The continued loss of innocence is mainly defined by the centralization as well as the corruption of Kazumasa, arguably a kind of ethical paragon in terms of his pursuit of real happiness and his disdain for the kind of circulation he nevertheless finds himself within. His loss of innocence happens when he turns his ball to the search of profit and extraction of Matacao.

**GGG's global aspirations**
Such minor internationalism is far short of any aspirations of globalism, however. GGG's own aspirations encompass the entire world.

**Pigeon Network crosses the Atlantic**
It is the Pigeon network that ends up coming closest to achieving this globality in Part V., though. Note that this coincides with the dismantling of the relationship between Batista and Tania, which from the beginning has also been a marker of innocence and lauded. Additionally, note that the global is presented here as something that exceeds comprehension. What is unable to be considered is here presented as undesirable, and globalism is one such thing. At the same time, Chico Paco's pilgrim network has been largely dematerialized further and turned into a radio show. This coincides with a distancing from his friend Gilberto, who has been marker of authentic relationships, and was the origin of Chico Paco's pilgrimages and holiness in the first place.


I have a couple more maps to do, but after this, as you know, everything collapses and returns to territory-based happiness, except where people die. The map I most want to exist is one that charts every movement beyond the extent of a city in terms of its speed as well as its magnitude. I think that in a sense the novel resolves on the contemplation of the geological timescale in terms of human activity.

