---
author: Phillip Polefrone
title: Global Circulation and Materiality in *Through the Arc of the Rain Forest*
date: December 3, 2014
coursename: Postcolonial Ecologies
profname: Professor Wenzel
---

Before beginning, I'd like to contextualize exactly what this presentation is in relation to the paper that will result from it, and what I hope to achieve by presenting it. The project I'm working on essentially has two major components in terms of the work that will go into it. I want to talk about the way that circulation of materials and commodities, and more specifically the scale and type of circulation, affects the depiction of material in general in *Through the Arc of the Rain Forest*. This requires the kind of work that usually goes into literary analysis: a fair amount of focused close-reading to trace the way that material depictions change over the course of the novel combined with engagement with some of the theorists we've read over the course of the semester, including Bill Brown and Zygmunt Bauman. Alongside this work, though, I want to also do another kind of work, which is what I'll be presenting today: mapping. As I read Yamashita's novel the first time, and especially as I reread it to flag passages, character movements, and quotations, I realized that it is almost impossible to make sense of it without keeping a mental map of which characters were where, and which of the other characters they're with. The reading experience of the novel is, I think, such a strange one in part because of the difficulty of keeping this map straight. But on a higher level, the work the novel is doing, and the sophisticated relation I see it making between globalization and materiality, relies on this sense of increasing scale and multiple, coexisting temporalities of movement. Therefore, in both this presentation and the paper, much of the argument will be run through a visual, spatial representation of the novel as a drama of network expansion, both for communicative reasons---explaining the novel to someone who'd never read it would take longer than visually presenting the novel's use of space---and for analytic reasons.

Finally, there is a methodological question underlying this effort that is of interest to me and which I might like to address, using this paper as a starting point, in another, future paper. That question is: *What would a digital environmental humanities look like?* Mapping is an obvious place to begin purusing one: more and more geospatial data is being gathered and analyzed as a way of approaching issues in environmental studies more broadly. At the same time, the Digital Humanities and the Environmental Humanities are coming into their own, and definitional questions are still being widely posed for each. Generally speaking, I work in both fields, and at some point, I need to start thinking about how to make them work together. This admittedly modest exploration is a first step in that direction.

I'd love if this context could guide your feedback to what I'm about to present, but of course I'd really appreciate any thoughts you have. This could be taken as somewhere between a draft of a conference paper and a version of part of the paper I will turn in on the fifteenth. So with that, I'll get to it.

#Introduction, or rather: Space, Things, Material

In Zygmunt Bauman's "Living (Occasionally Dying) in an Urban World," he presents a conception of space that is new, that has emerged with---and may be coextensive with---globalization and global capitalism. He defines his "the space of flows" **Slide** as the spatial dimension "where global powers reside and operate," in which 

>it is the *speed of movement and facility to escape*, not the size of *territorial possessions* (and so responsibilities), that count and decide.… New empires are not of this world---not of earthly, geographical world, not of the "space of places." (112)

[+1 sentence] Although his focus here is primarily on territoriality itself, his "space of flows" can also provide a way to discuss materiality in terms both of spatial understanding, and in the context of a global market. Is the international object, which is built in one place specifically to be shipped to and used in another, the same as the object used by the person who builds it, and used primarily where it was built? If territorial possession is anathema to global power, what about the possessions that [define the] territory? In Bauman's primarily geographical account of the space of flows, a more fundamental view of power and materiality remains unstated, but is nevertheless constitutive. Namely, that global power is greater the less it is constrained by materiality. Put another way: power can increase to a global scale only to the extent that it can operate independently of material limitations. 

Karen Tei Yamashita's *Through the Arc of the Rainforest* can be read as a surreal, comedic, but nonetheless sophisticated case study in a very similar principle. The relationship of global power and global capitalism to space is mirrored in the treatment of *things* that results from it. Narratively, these relationships express themselves in several ways. As you might expect, movement is represented directly as characters respond to various circumstances personal, spiritual, or profit-driven. But other kinds of movement also exist in the novel that allow characters to remain essentially stationary but move *in absentia*, that is, through the circulation of commodities. It's through circulation of this kind that Yamashita's Bauman-esque view of territoriality comes into contact with her treatment of material *things*: the drive to scale up power and influence, a drive that is often external to the characters' own motivations and wishes, causes them to lose sight of *things* as fundamentally material entities, a departure dramatized in the novel's explosive conclusion. Instead, they begin to understand *things* in terms of exchange, movement, and *networks* of circulation. At the same time, this dim view of material objects is accompanied by a kind of push-back by everything that is lost when the material substratum of exchange is ignored. The Matacão, almost a character itself, is the most obvious example: it's an underground, impenetrable mass of congealed plastic with magnetic, magical, and eventually disease-causing properties, and it results from waste-production of a kind that is only possible through a similar ignorance of the material essence of objects on a massive scale. Elsewhere, materiality is associated with more basic (and implicitly more valued) social relationships, which express themselves in the pain of their loss when the immaterial obsession has finally run its course. This continual back-and-forth---with market forces dematerializing everything on one hand and the material, natural basis of *things* reasserting itself in various ways in response---boils down to an ethical stance on the novel's part, a stance that privileges attention to materiality over the immateriality of circulation on a global scale.

This is not a novel about things on their own, though, and the circulation of things can be obscured by the circulation of *people*, which predictably garners more focus. In fact, the circulations of things and people are more difficult to keep separate than would be the case in a less imaginative novel. It is the way objects and people interact in a non-market sense that ultimately mediates the way people interact with markets: and thus, how they interact with global circulation networks and power. 

From the opening paragraph, the boundary between thing and person is destabilized through the many object-appendages that come close to defining the characters. Kazumasa has a ball floating in front of his forehead that is made out of a plastic-like material, something similar to (or at least that reacts to) the stuff of the Matacão. This ball has fallen from the sky and has attached itself to him permanently, so permanently that, by implication, the only way to take it from him is by killing him. His object-appendage provides Kazumasa a job when it starts to be attracted to weaknesses in railroad tracks, and its peculiar nature it also puts *Kazumasa* in motion. Though the beginning of his life is narrowly confined to a scale consistent with the powers of his unaugmented body, 
**Slide 2: 1NetworkJapan0**
the moment his abilities are extended by the object that is augmenting him---the moment, we might say, in which the ball becomes a prosthetic---the scale of his influence expands. 
**Slide 3: 1NetworkJapan1**
A great deal of emphasis is placed on the geographic boundaries of his movement to emphasize this increase: it is made very clear that he is traveling from Hokkaido, the northernmost portion of Japan, to Nagasaki, which is located in the south. Is Kazumasa put into motion or put into circulation? Now is a moment for some definitions. Circulation in the sense I'm using it here relies on exchange, and more specifically the exchange of commodities. When I say commodity I mean specifically an object that is a product of labor, that is both used and exchanged, and which therefore has both use-value and exchange-value. (In other words I mean it in Marx's sense---the usefulness of which for my purposes I'll discuss this more shortly.) Kazumasa's ball is not a product of labor, and therefore the *ball* is not a commodity in itself. But something else is happening here in terms of the changing materiality of Kazumasa's self as a result of his prosthesis. The ball is his only way of performing the labor by which he supports himself, namely, riding around detecting weaknesses in train tracks. In a sense unique to the novel, Kazumasa's labor power is externalized---objectified in the ball. Though the ball may not be a commodity in itself, it is in part a way of representing Kazumasa's commodified labor power. 

I should pause to make clear that I'm not suggesting a reductive, allegorical reading of the ball as only (and entirely) commodified labor. (Lest we forget, the ball is also the narrator of the novel.) I am merely arguing that it acts as such in its relation to Kazumasa. It is also something more like an essence of his identity---but more on this later.

Understanding Kazumasa's ball as his labor power externalized can also add some useful context to the conditions of his increasing obsolescence as a railroad maintainer, especially as it relates to the size of his sphere of influence. When Kazumasa eventually loses his position with the railroad company, it is because a new, bigger company has taken over that has *replicated his ball exactly* as a mechanical device (**cite**). With the ball understood as externalized labor power, the one-for-one replacement of human labor by its mechanical equivalent is imagined as the mechanical reproduction of an object. The result of this replacement is a decrease in the geographical extent of Kazumasa's labor. He is fired, taking a cut in pay and a major curtailment of the distance he travels per day: "**quote**" (**cite**). 
**Slide 4: 1NetworkJapan2**
In the first place, a relationship is established here that persists throughout: geographic scale correlates with economic power, represented here in that a diminution of distance covered leads to a wage cut. But the mechanization of Kazumasa's ball has a further-reaching effect of Kazumasa himself. Just as his ball enters a larger system of essentially mechanical objects, Kazumasa himself becomes, to some extent, mechanical. His circulation in the system has a strict, regulated period, and the task has all the mindless repetition so characteristic of work within an extensive division of labor. A similar diminution of Kazumasa as an individual occurs later, when the ball has again been mass-produced, this time as a fashion accessory: "**quote**" (**cite**). In both cases, the characterstics of the ball's circulation in a larger system of objects determines the character of Kazumasa's own interaction with larger systems, whether economic, cultural, or social. It is no surprise that Kazumasa's diminishing status causes him to flee Japan for another locale: São Paulo. 
**Slide 5: 1MovementBrazil0**

Finally, this externalized ability enables him to detect Matacão plastic deposits, a potentially massive source of global wealth. 

Chico Paco's pilgrimages derive from a non-objectified spirituality, but when this spirituality is objectified as an altar he becomes famous, finally coming into his own as a radio star and extending his influence through a network of constantly moving pilgrims.  Mané Pena, who lives on top of the Matacão and initially unearths it, has a "magic" feather for his part, though the only thing magical about it seems to be its ability to relieve stress when rubbed behind the ear. His fixation on these objects leads to his definition according to them: he becomes a world-famous doctor of "featherology" and gets drawn into the global trade of feathers for medicinal and recreational use. Batista and Tania Aparecida train a remarkable bunch of pigeons that lift them out of routine and lead them to founding a global communication network, but the pigeons serve as a kind of extension of Batista from the moment he finds it. Such appendages do not have to be objects, then: nevertheless, materiality is associated with the plant an animal world, and so they fall on the "non-market" side of the ethics I'm arguing Yamashita is establishing in this novel. Finally, and most literally, J. B. Tweep's supplementary appendage is his third arm, which enhances his manual abilities like typing and organizing, an advantage that becomes generalized into success in business through a philosophy of threes he calls "trialectics." Each of these extensions of self eventually becomes monetized, even though each of them begins as a constitutive element of the person to whom it is attached, or who fixates on it. With the monetization the object and its owner enter the stream of circulation.  This is the sense in which commodity circulation becomes a means of extending the scale one's movement and, in a sense, extending the limits of the self: when the commodity enters circulation, so does the character. 

At first glance, this view of the circulation of commodities, as though circulation can exist without the underlying object, seems counter-intuitive, fantastic, even in ways that go beyond the counter-intuitive fantasizing of the novel. This view would be incorrect in two senses, though. First, the novel itself provides a model for understanding circulation *in itself*, that is, without needing something to circulate. GGG, the corporation founded by Georgia and Geoffrey Gamble that finances J. B. Tweep's large-scale harvesting of Matacão, exists solely on the basis of this kind of circulation, and provides the model by which it can be understood. Like the novel itself, GGG is a kind of terrarium containing constant motion. Its workers are constantly rushing around smoking, yelling at each other, moving things from room to room, and copying documents that refer to nothing. This activity differs from business-as-usual in one important sense: it produces nothing; it has no object. Several times in the J. B. Tweep sections of the novel, a great plan or realization is mentioned on the basis of which the Gambles started their business, but it is never clear entirely what it is. After being sacked by the shareholders, they destroy a small "card" that appears to be the object at the center of the business, or at least some regulating mechanism. Twice it is referred to as a "microchip," but this is the same as making it a non-thing: an unspecified microchip is scarcely an object in itself, more a symbol of the immateriality of the virtual. The important point is that this object, though it is at the center of GGG, is entirely inessential to it. Nobody but Georgia and Geoffrey even know about it, and everything continues without it. The genius of GGG's founders lies, at bottom, in this unnecessary central symbol. It is understanding precisely that the object itself is eminently unimportant in relation to the conditions of its exchange, hence the ability of the company to "probably go on almost forever without" the "missing product" that Georgia and Geoff Gamble destroy on their way out of the firm (21). Because they've invented a company that does not even have to pretend to create something with use-value, a parade of cloned, identical functionaries photocopying their resumes is sufficient to the its continuation. GGG's circulation without production is not just the model for the kind of commodity circulation GGG is responsible for. It is the model for all the circulation of objects that takes place in *Through the Arc of the Rainforest*. 

The second reason it makes sense to talk about circulation in the absence of, and even destroying, the object that is circulated requires a turn to Marx's view of the commodity and Bill Brown's extension of it in his "Thing Theory," the latter of which I won't be able to bring in until the larger paper. The dematerialization of the commodity can be understood in terms of the division between use-value and exchange-value with which Marx begins the first volume of *Capital*. Most basically and very reductively, use-value is the value of the thing as an object, what it is good for to those who *use* it; exchange-value, on the other hand, is a comparative relation of value through trade. This second value appears to be an inherent value to the object itself, when in fact it is anything but. Without belaboring the details, this separation of material utility and immaterial exchange is very useful for thinking through the model of circulation established in the GGG passages and, through those, the way circulation of trade goes global in general---both in the novel and in the world. Financialization is one of the mechanisms of globalization of capital, and essentially just means separating exchange-value from use-value through profitable circulation. We might think of commodities traders, swapping bundled of commodities without realizing what they're swapping is two parts frozen orange juice and three parts cattle futures, neither of which they deal with directly: to say that circulation depends on an object in this case would come as quite a surprise to those profiting from circulation without much consideration of its material use. In GGG's case, the card containing the totality of the company's product becomes a symbol of this loss of the material side of exchange, and in becoming so it provides the key to understanding the way the many monetized objects, and the people they represent, work in the novel. Each of these objects is practically meaningless in itself, like the feathers that are spread around the globe before they begin to be made synthetically. But the social structures and value systems that inhere in each makes each sufficient to its own form of circulation---value systems like feather addiction (comparisons to tobacco appear throughout), religion, or communication are the masks by which this profit-driven deemphasis of the material thing is concealed. Consistent with commodity logic, the material aspects of the thing are overlooked in favor of exchange value and, through it, social value. To quote a more famous passage from Marx, under capitalism---and we should specify, especially global, financial capitalism---"All that is solid melts into air."

#Narrative Structure and the Expansion of Circulation Networks

I'll get to the maps shortly, but as a final bit of context, it's worth drawing some attention to the way the chapters of the book are organized and the section titles they're placed under. **read from slide** Each of these sections is split into chapters focusing more or less on one of the major characters. About the simplest thing you can say regarding the progress of these narratives in terms of space is that each of the characters starts out in a different place, and they all eventually converge on the Matacão. I'll be focusing on a different kind of movement, though, one more in line with commodity circulation. The maps I'm about to show aim to demonstrate that the novel's narrative structure corresponds to a step-by-step increase in the scale of circulation marshaled by each character, and in some cases the centralization of those circulation networks into one larger one, even as the characters come together geographically on the Matacão. These increases eventually collapse into a return to small-scale circulation and renewed appreciation of material values even where they also result in widespread destruction. In the longer version of the paper, this will be more closely correlated with the changing depiction of commodities. There are also some maps missing from the end, specifically the (perhaps) most important ones that will represent different temporalities of movement—--the human, market, and geographical temporalities---as they relate to the ethics of materiality discussed above.

As a more specific solicitation for feedback, now that I've made these things, I'm trying to figure out how useful they are. For the time being, I'll just go through them with a few thoughts on each. So when we get to feedback later I'd love to hear if they helped people, or if not, and how they might be focused or improved.

##1. Kazumasa's humble beginning

Kazumasa starts off in a small town, only occasionally walking to the first town over on errands. We know it is near Sado Island because of a brief reference in the beginning.

##2. Kazumasa enters circulation

Kazumasa gets a job on a train, where he discovers the power of his ball. Here the metaphor of the circuit, and therefore the basic structure of circulation, is established with the image of the railroad. Kazumasa gets the ball despite his job, but the expansion of his circuit is a direct result of his object-appendage. Besides the responsibility of this object for his travel, a great deal of emphasis is put on the geographic scale of his movement: it is made very clear that he is traveling from Hokkaido, the northernmost portion of Japan, to Nagasaki, which is located in the south.

##3. Kazumasa's network diminishes

Kazumasa is ousted because a tool based on his ball is developed to do the same work. **Read quote** This is the only time in the novel, to my knowledge, that a network becomes smaller until they all collapse at the end. Note that the diminution of the network maps directly to a cut in pay: wealth and network size correlate throughout. Also, it is interesting that the short period of the train's revolution is emphasized as a way to emphasize the circuit's tininess. Speed of movement does not necessarily map to an increase in global power: only when it is accompanied by an increase in scale. A decrease in global relevance would break the rules of the novel, though, so.... **Slide**

##4. Kazumasa goes to São Paulo

Increasing his relevance is not Kazumasa's stated reason for going to São Paulo, of course---doing so is far from important in his eyes. He goes because it sounds like a nice place and he has a cousin there. Nevertheless, what actually happens to his global network will be seen.

##5. Batista and Tania Aparecida Djapan's Pigeon Network

These are the city limits of São Paulo, with all the public transportation lines marked in black. In the center is the beginning of the pigeon network, starting with a single pigeon that is injured on the sidewalk. It's important to note that Batista's life changes dramatically due to his fixation on this first pigeon: his interests and routines are all mediated through it from the beginning.

##6. A Single Pigeon Increases the Scale

When Tania tries to get rid of the pigeon, she only inadvertently increases its range and kicks off the expansion of the pigeon network. **read quote** At this point the combination of the pigeons status as a kind of appendage becomes also a type of circulation in that it establishes a circuit.

##7. Pigeon Network Exceeds São Paulo

The pigeon goes further. The increase in network scale interestingly coincides with the training of a creature, linking up the physical capabilities of the animal with the extension of Batista's influence.

##8. Chico Paco's first pilgrimage

About the same time, Chico Paco begins the pilgrimage to establish an altar to St. George on the Matacão. This is an example of individual movement rather than a circuit, until...

##9. Trip Becomes Circuit

...the trip becomes a circuit in Part II. This is actually a mistake; Chico Paco's next trip is to São Paulo. Nevertheless, the beginning of the pattern of pilgrimages and returns establishes a kind of one-man circulation of prayer. This is especially so because his individual circulation is motivated by a larger network of communication and requests.

##10. Pigeon Networks cover a whole region, get funding

**read quote** The funding here is important, as is the "test flight": this is not only no longer a one-pigeon operation, it is no longer a two-person operation. The increase in scale is now in two dimensions, between range and number of agents. Its increase will only, of course, continue. Moving into Part II involves an change in type as well as extent for both Chico Paco and Batista & Tania.

##11. All Brazil Networks in Part II

Here are all the networks as of part two, plus J.B. Tweep's entrance. Note that the setting has stopped being individual, atomized towns, and has started being regions of Brazil. In Part II, we have moved from the local to the regional.

##12. Global networks, part i - part iii: before

Moving from Part II: The Developing World to Part III: More Development is a matter of moving from the regional to the national and, in the case of GGG, the international. Here is how things look when they begin, with GGG bound to productless circulation and containment and Batista and Tania limited to a single injured pigeon. But here... **slide**

##13. Global networks...: after 

Is what happens when other forces come into play. For GGG, it is the subsumption of Mané Pena's feather business and their development into commodities on top of the massive flow of capital to transform the Matacão into a base of operations. **read quote  on right**. The Pigeon network now covers a majority of the country, and on top of that has enough pigeons to necessitate a truck. **read quote on left** It has entered the public consciousness.

##14. Pigeon network and pilgrim network combine

The pigeon network is now also combined with Chico Paco's emerging votive circuit, as Batista is accompanying Chico Paco in a truck. With Part IV: Loss of Innocence, networks start combining or being centralized into larger units, multiplying the scale of all of them.

##15. Networks go international

But above all, the Loss of Innocence is characterized by the transgression of or extension to the limits of national borders. The Pigeon network surpasses GGG's network: **read quote**. Chico Paco's one-person pious mission is expanded into a many-person votive network of constant motion, with volunteers making pilgrimages all over the country. **read quote**

##16. centralization

The continued loss of innocence is mainly defined by the centralization as well as the corruption of Kazumasa, arguably a kind of ethical paragon in terms of his pursuit of real happiness and his disdain for the kind of circulation he nevertheless finds himself within. His loss of innocence happens when he turns his ball to the search of profit and extraction of Matacao: **read quote, left then right**

##17. GGG's global aspirations

Such minor internationalism is far short of any aspirations of globalism, however. GGG's own aspirations encompass the entire world: **read quote**

##18. Pigeon network crosses the Atlantic

It is the Pigeon network that ends up coming closest to achieving this globality in Part V., though. **read quotes on right** Note that this coincides with the dismantling of the relationship between Batista and Tania, which from the beginning has also been a marker of innocence and lauded. Additionally, note that the global is presented here as something that exceeds comprehension. What is unable to be considered is here presented as undesirable, and globalism is one such thing. At the same time, Chico Paco's pilgrim network has been largely dematerialized further and turned into a radio show. This coincides with a distancing from his friend Gilberto, who has been marker of authentic relationships, and was the origin of Chico Paco's pilgrimages and holiness in the first place.


I have a couple more maps to do, but after this, as you know, everything collapses and returns to territory-based happiness, except where people die. The map I most want to exist is one that charts every movement beyond the extent of a city in terms of its speed as well as its magnitude. I think that in a sense the novel resolves on the contemplation of the geological timescale in terms of human activity.

