---
Title: Effictio, Notatio, and Community in the General Prologue
Author: Phillip R. Polefrone
...

Effictio and Notatio, in Cicero's *Ad C. Herennium de Ratione Dicendi*, are defined as "representing and depicting in words clearly enough for recognition the bodily form of some person" (effictio) and "describing a person's character by the definite signs which...are attributes of that character," with the result that "any one's ruling passion can be brought into the open" (Cicero 387-395). While these rhetorical techniques appear in Geoffrey Chaucer's *The Canterbury Tales*, and especially in the "General Prologue," they do not work in quite the way that Cicero defined them. Instead, effictio most often indicates in Chaucer's usage a base, materialist, or even sinful character, while notatio is usually reserved for those characters who are more idealized, or at least viewed more sympathetically. Effictio and notatio as they are used to describe the miller and the plowman in the "General Prologue," however, work differently still. In the plowman's portrait, notatio indicates a community-mindedness and generosity that results in Christian virtue, while in the miller's effictio indicates a secular materialism that results in financial abuse of community; in the opposition of effictio and notatio in these two portraits, Chaucer implicitly critiques economic relations (as opposed to social ones) within the estate of the *laboratores*. 

In the miller's and plowman's portraits in the General Prologue, Chaucer uses the rhetorical strategies of effictio and notatio to enforce contrasting portraits. While the plowman is described almost entirely by notatio, a description of characteristics and actions, the miller is described by almost purely physical means, in the tradition of effictio. Where the plowman "hadde ylad of dong ful many a fother" and is a "trewe swinker," the miller is "a stout carl," "[f]ul big...of brawn, and eek of bones" (532, 548). A syntactic corollary is evident in these lines that characterizes the portraits more generally and reinforces the effects of effictio and notatio: there are very few adjectives in the plowman's portrait, while there are a preponderance of them in the miller's. Where the plowman has only "trewe," the miller has "stout," "big"; other lines describing the miller are almost half adjective, as in, "He was short-sholdred, brood, a thikke knare" (551). Adjectives come to be flags of effictio marking primarily physical definition. The primacy of effictio and notatio in each portrait is also reinforced by a structural chiasmus. The plowman's portrait begins with notatio and concludes with a single line of effictio: "In a tabard he rood upon a mere," with "tabard" describing his dress and "mere" describing his meager equipage (543). The miller's portrait is a neat inversion, beginning with effictio and concluding with a passage of notatio in which his vulgar "skills" are detailed. Finally, in each portrait the primary rhetorical mode is only reinforced by examples of its counterpart. For the plowman, the portrait of an impoverished, hard-working person is driven home by the description of his possessions, which are so slight as to be almost statements of lack. The miller's "notatio" is really a parody, in which the things he does "well" are all things he ought not do at all. The impression of an uncouth "carl" created by his physical portrait is confirmed by the elaborations of his character and actions.[^.1] In both cases, the dominant rhetorical strategy of the portrait is *so* dominant as to enlist its opposite as reinforcement.

In the plowman's portrait, notatio comes to indicate an orientation toward other persons and community. From the start, the plowman is rendered with respect to the people in his community, to such an extent that his individual character seems only to exist in its interaction with others. The first line establishes the rule that drives the rest of the sketch: "With him there was a plowman, was his brother" (531). The plowman here is "with," subjugated grammatically to his social environment. Furthermore, he is not "the plowman" (as the miller is "[t]he miller" in the next sketch [547]), but is "a plowman" among many, a stand-in for an entire class. Even this classification appears to be too egocentric for the plowman, though, for the sentence is completed by a paratactic clause "was his brother," again resituating the newly named plowman with relation to his traveling companion. The "good[ness]" of the plowman comes to be related to his social orientation, for the statement of it is continued with the *hypotactic* "[l]ivinge in pees and parfit charitée" (534). Thus while Chaucer uses parataxis to elide the plowman's individual identity in favor of community, he uses parataxis to elaborate this very elision as an ethical boon. Furthermore, the deeds and characteristics elaborated in the notatio portion of the plowman's portrait are all beneficial to the community, further emphasizing the connection of notatio and communality. The work ethic that so defines the plowman is not used for personal or economic gain. Instead, when he "dike[s] and delve[s]," it is "For Christes sake, for every poure wight, / Withouten hire, if it lay in his might" (539-540). The paratactic and hypotactic strategies above here combine: the impoverished class becomes equated with Christ through paratactic equation,[^1] and the amalgam formed thereby is identified hypotactically with abnegation of economic gain. Notatio, parataxis, and hypotaxis combine to form an association of notatio descriptions with orientation toward the community and away from the self.

As notatio indicates a community-mindedness in the plowman, so effictio indicates a corresponding opposite orientation towards objects and material goods in the miller. Unlike the plowman, the miller comes alone and is presented as a closed unit, unassociated with any community; the way he is presented physically, though, is peculiarly engaged with objects, and object-orientation comes to define his person in the same way that community-orientation defines the plowman's. In some cases, his own physicality is rendered in its potential for interaction with items and non-human material: Chaucer says that "[t]her was no dore that he ne wolde heve of harre, / [o]r breke it at a renning with his heed," using interaction with the door to invoke abstract physical might in the first line and an image of the head in the second (552-3). The head in this second line is defined as an instrument in itself, but it is also rendered purely in the way that it interacts with the material and object world. Elsewhere, however, his association with objects is even more direct and identifying, as he is both described by comparison to objects and even hybridized with them. In one moment, his "berd" is "therto brood, as though it were a spade," using the physical properties of an instrument to perform an effictio description (554-5); in another moment, "[h]is mouth as greet [is] as a greet forneys," causing him to share not only a comparison but even an adjective with an object (561). Comparison still implies a measure of separation, however, unlike when he is described as a "knarre," or knot in wood (551). His hybridization is completed when Chaucer asserts that "he hadde a thombe of gold," on one hand making reference to a proverb about the dishonesty of millers but on the other objectifying and dehumanizing human flesh (565). This constitutive interaction of the miller with objects becomes directly opposed to the plowman's interactions with people in the way the miller uses the objects that are external to him. In both cases, they are tools of either destruction or communal dissolution. He has a "swerd and a bokeler" and a "baggepipe" (560, 567); the former is a means of injuring other people, while the latter drives people away ("therwithal he broghte us out of towne" [568]). And unlike the plowman, who works "[w]ithouten hire" whenever possible, the miller's materialist economic orientation is definitively anti-community, as "[w]el coude he stelen corn, and tollen thries" (564). The opposition of effictio and notatio thus becomes an opposition between communality and materiality, loving people and loving objects.

The many differences indicated by the opposition between effictio and notatio come to mirror the split between heavenly, spiritual concerns and earthly, material ones, thus implicitly presenting a difference between types of labor that adhere to a Christian view of morality and those that violate it. The Christian-inflected laudation of the plowman is explicit and unmistakable, and its association with the notatio mode of description is evident in that three of the five sentences of notatio mention God, Christ, and the church, respectively (535-41). It is also important to note the extent to which his godliness is associated with his labor practices. The paratactic series "For Christes sake, for every poure wight," discussed above, implicitly equates Christ and the poor as the beneficiaries of work "withouten hire," or without pay (539-40). The reference to Matthew 22:37-39, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," links communality and piety, causing labor that benefits the community above the individual---and especially labor outside any economic agreement---to become both a social and religious activity. The miller's relationship to his work, to economy, and to piety is of a very different character. One of the major differences between the labor performed by the plowman and that performed by the miller, despite their both being members of the *laboratores* estate, is that the plowman is a directly agricultural worker while the miller is one step removed. Thus, while the plowman's raw material comes directly from nature and from God, the miller's raw material includes the labor of others.[^2] This puts him in such a position that his work begins with an economic transaction of obtaining grain, putting him in a more complex financial situation. Whether this situation leads unfairly to the proverb cited by the Trapp, Gray, and Boffey as the source of the miller's golden thumb[^3] is a reasonable question, but in Chaucer's rendering the miller is accurately described by that proverb: after all, this miller "[w]el coude...stelen corn, and tollen thries" (564). "[S]telen corn" and "tollen thries" become defining aspects of the miller's task as a laborer. Except for the possible association of the miller with Judas via his red hair,[^4] the miller would seem to be associated with secularism more than outright sin. The emphasis on objects over people that so characterizes the effictio description of the miller comes to denote a secular materialism that is directly opposed to the plowman's impoverished purity; their labor practices in turn mirror these orientations. Effictio and notatio as they are used in presenting the miller and the plowman contain an implicit critique of labor practices that benefit the individual over the community, associating such behavior with the base physicality and uncouth vulgarity of the miller.

Where in Cicero's definition of them effictio and notatio simply defined, almost technical terms, in Chaucer's hands they become effective tools of critique. The physicality of the miller comes to indicate his relation to objects, while the simultaneous poverty and "charitée" of the plowman becomes a statement of Christian virtue and community-mindedness. The opposition of these techniques culminates in a critique of the use and abuse of money in relations within a community of *laboratores*. Chaucer's economic message must not be overstated: while he does seem to be urging fairness horizontally within a community, nothing about the estate structure as such is challenged by this message. Nevertheless, the association of religious virtue with standards of fiscal behavior is a here a subtle maneuver, and one that shows a deft manipulation of apparently technical rhetorical structures for social ends.

Works Cited

Cicero, M. Tulli. *Ad C. Herennium de Ratione Dicendi (Rhetorica Ad Herennium)*. Ed. and trans. Harry Caplan. *Archive.org*. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UP, 1964. Web. 8 Dec. 2013.

Chaucer, Geoffrey. "The Canterbury Tales: General Prologue." *Medieval English Literature*. Ed. J.B. Trapp, Douglas Gray, and Julia Boffey. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford UP, 2002. Print. 122-151.

[^.1]: Even the interaction of rhyme and syntax in the miller's section emphasize his uncouthness. Where the plowman passage's rhymes, with one exception (537-8), tend to rhyme within the sentence unit, the miller passage's rhymes sprawl across periods with no regard for neatness or decorum. the end of one sentence, "knarre," is rhymed with "harre" in the next, and the same thing happens in the couple of couplets that follow. 

[^1]: The significance of this equation is discussed below. 

[^2]: In the Marxian sense, in which the value of a commodity includes the value of raw material, which in turn includes the crystallized labor required to produce that raw material. The Marxist case should not be overstated; the miller's fault in Chaucer's portrait of him is not exploitation of labor per se so much as dishonest economic dealings. Nevertheless, this fact does put him at one level of remove from directly agricultural labor, and does put him in the position that allows for his dishonest conduct.

[^3]: "An honest miller has a golden thumb"---see note on page 141.

[^4]: As Trapp, Gray, and Boffey also point out---see note on page 140.