It is difficult to reconcile Williams's and Hall's representations of hegemony. The multiplicity of determining forces in hegemony is a major topic for both writers, and this complexity of "internal structures" (Williams 8) and its "multi-dimensional, multi-arena character" (Hall 424) are for both the means by which the term rescues marxist criticism from a too-simple determinism. The relation of hegemony in general to the marxist cause, however, is less clear. William seems to implicitly position hegemony as an obstacle to any substantive progressive change, saying that were hegemony less imbricated with the material of everyday practice "it would be---and one would be glad---a very much easier thing to overthrow" (9). By suggesting that hegemony is a thing to be overthrown, Williams reveals the extent to which his analysis is to some extent teleological: in this light the emergent elements of culture are identified as the most likely means of subverting the dominant, and the critical proposition that he concludes with is drawn into the orbit of that project. As Hall points out, though, the term is more complicated in its origin and status with respect to marxist discourse than Williams's treatment of it might suggest. In both Lenin's *and* Gramsci's initial use of the term, following Hall, hegemony appears as a stage in the tactics of a proletarian revolution, a means by which a "system of alliances" is created that will be sufficient to oppose the rule of capital (425). In Hall's extension, furthermore, the development of hegemony becomes site for new kinds of struggle for determining social formation; hegemony is the site of contestation until it can be controlled, at which point it seems to become a tool of development for the state and society. Another way of phrasing the difference between their two views of it would be: Is hegemony itself aligned with capitalism in all cases, or is it one part of culture that, like the means of production, must be the site of contest?

To extend the question into more directly cultural criticism: how can we understand Jameson's conception of mass culture, with its complex relationship of the pacifying utopian fantasy and the actual ideological content, in relation to dominant class and hegemony? The question arises from a difficulty in determining the source, or even the working delimiters, of "mass culture" as an entity. Presumably mass culture, at least in America, arises out of large-scale producers of media like the "Big Six" publishing houses and the major movie studios. (The viability of independent film and self-published novels would speak, I think, to their incorporation into the dominant culture and thus the expansion of that culture, not its circumvention.) But do these sources produce works of mass culture in order to fulfill consumerist desires *determined* by hegemonic dominance, or are works of mass culture the means by which those desires are instilled in the first place? Put another way: which comes first, the "mass" or the "culture"? My guess is that the dual-nature of Jameson's mass-cultural object holds the answer. The representational realization of the utopian desire points to a unity that indicates an existing dominant culture---Jameson's representation would appear to require a coherent (and thus instilled?) utopian vision, even if the vision is simply of coherence itself. Simultaneously, though, the other half of Jameson's equation instills or reinforces the ideology that gives rise to the utopian vision; the utopian vision would seem not to be an entity independent of ideological influence, and may even be an especially pure expression of it. Jameson's mass culture is thus even more oddly reflexive than it initially appears, appealing on one hand to something that is the result of what it simultaneously establishes on the other.