---
author: Phillip Polefrone
---

I am interested in the subtle undercurrent of socialist ethics and morality in Perry Anderson's response to E. P. Thompson. (I am not using ethics and morality in the technical senses specified by Nancy Fraser in her work on redistribution and recognition, as Anderson does not seem to uphold that distinction in his usage.) This thread of Anderson's discussion is most overt in the "Marxism" chapter of his *Arguments*, particularly in the context of the reluctance of Marx and Engels to posit a moral or ethical system. Anderson explains that Marx and Engels "were so chary of ethical discussions of socialism" because of "their tendency to become *substitutes* for explanatory accounts of history," even though "Engels himself emphasized that 'a really human morality' would be one of the hallmarks of communism" (86). Thompson, he later says, has incompletely heeded these warnings in his too-simple valorization or condemnation of Walpole, Swift, and others; while Anderson finds some propagation of a system of values appropriate to socialist practice, he objects to Thompson's view of "history as an album of value to be bequeathed from individual to individual" as being historically vapid, while at the same time simplifying the resultant moral account to the point of incoherence. This is the difficulty in these conflicting visions of morality---and it is a difficulty that Anderson represents without attempting to solve, for good reason: first, that the reluctance to systematize a socialist morality allows unsatisfactory approaches such as Thompson's to stand in for a more rigorous system; and second, that deference to Marxist orthodoxy prevents elaboration of this under-theorized realm of socialist thought, precisely because it is under-theorized in the work of Marx and Engels. I mention this second point because Anderson himself frequently concludes, or even constitutes entire, a rebuttal with the statement that some assertion "is not---plainly not---a Marxist one" (83, for example, but others abound). This characteristic move occurs time and again despite his apparent approval at the innovation of new Marxist theory that builds on and revises Marxist orthodoxy, in particular Raymond Williams's at the end of the "Stalinism" chapter. Without taking Nancy Fraser's work on redistribution and recognition as a solution to this formidable problem, the lack of a moral system seems in part to motivate the use of moral philosophy as a theoretical framework for her discussion as well as the topic itself. One of the enduring strengths of the "recognition" movement seems to be its status as an ethical system, something that any economic theory tends to lack as a matter of scope. Fraser addresses this apparent lack, though, by theorizing redistribution as itself a matter of justice. In opening up these basically economic questions, Fraser invites further elaboration of a socialist morality and ethics. It is difficult to say, however, how much of this work she has already done herself.