---
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
date: March 26, 2014
---

What can Bruno Latour show us about the Marxian “metabolism” of human and environment? To begin, in both Marx and Latour there exists a peculiar imbrication of the object and the built environment. Latour’s favored image of the “speaking grill” is an example of this overlap: it is the instrumental *object* that has a function---a kind of implement for preventing attack---and a structural aspect of the environment, the physicalization and reinforcement of a social distinction. For Latour, the physical object is in part conceived as the “*means* of constructing the social world.” We might shift the emphasis from “means” to “social” here: in a sense Latour seems to move from the material to the social more quickly than Marx does (and with Marx, Harvey and Foster). Marx’s metabolism, which seems to be the centerpiece of Foster’s reading, is in many ways an assimilation of the material into the material: by rendering the relationship of the human to the environment in the terms of Liebig, Anderson, and others, Foster’s Marx allows for a somewhat fuller material analysis before the material*ist* move of asking how that relates to the social. (This is not to privilege Marx’s analysis over Latour’s, or vice versa, so much as to suggest a difference.) In this vein, Marx’s engagement with division of labor in volume one of *Capital* becomes very interesting, illustrating the extent to which material change occurs as a result of interaction with the realm of objects:

>The tailor, the locksmith, and the other artificers, being now exclusively occupied in carriage-making, each gradually loses, through want of practice, the ability to carry on, to its full extent, his old handicraft. (205)

>But whatever may have been [divison of labor’s] starting point, its final form is invariably the same---a productive mechanism whose parts are human beings. (207)

The first passage shows the influence of the object on the materiality of the human. The extreme division of labor in the factory setting^[Harvey points out that this is presented as quite different from the social division of labor in a society.] degrades the worker to the point of inability to return to handicraft, narrowing the range of possibilities that worker has to influence environment. Insofar as the *implement* is a factor in the division of labor---and here and elsewhere Marx points out its centrality to the process---we see the object partially determining the range of interactions open to the worker. And yet, in the second of these quotations, it is clear that the object’s determination of human action leads to the creation of yet another object made out of human beings. In the context of the physical specialization of the worker, this figuration becomes a considerably less metaphorical. As the implement becomes honed---literally in some cases---to its task, so does the human body become altered in form. This in turn adds fruitful context to such passages in *Marx’s Ecology* as: “[Humans] themselves begin to distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to *produce* their means of subsistence, a step which is conditioned by their physical organisation. By producing their means of subsistence men are indirectly producing their material life” (qtd. in Foster 115). Here the production of “material life” includes the workers’ physical bodies, which in turn condition the production of “their means of subsistence”---the extent to which the environment produced by the human influences the production of the human is here extended further. 

As much for myself as anything---I’m working on some similar issues in Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s *Herland* right now, a project that has been quite influenced by Foster---I am including a partial list of relevant quotes:

Foster (quote from Marx):
[Humans] themselves begin to distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to *produce* their means of subsistence, a step which is conditioned by their physical organisation. By producing their means of subsistence men are indirectly producing their material life.
	The way in which men produce their means of subsistence depends first of all on the nature of the means of subsistence they actually find in existence and have to reproduce. (qtd. in Foster 115)
	
Latour:

[*inter*action] signifies that action must be *shared* with other kinds of actants dispersed in other spatio-temporal frameworks and who exhibit other kinds of ontology. [This leads to the interaction with interactions with objects and situations at t-1 to influence those at t+1, etc.]

The life of Parisians, for example, is perhaps made up only of successive interactions, but we should not forget the multiple panoptica that strive each day to sum up Parisian life. Control rooms that manage traffic lights; panels at all points of the water distribution network; huge synoptic tableaux allowing French electricity board officials to calculate down to the second the end of a film being broadcast on Channel First.... In a single day and from a single person many small “I”s are collected---statistical “I”s because she has used her car, flushed her toilet, turned off her television set, put out her rubbish bin or visited the Orsay museum. (239)

Thousands of people in Paris strive to locally structure Parisians---each using their own equipment and their own categories.…All that remains is to restore to it what [ethnomethodology] had itself forgotten: the *means* of constructing the social world. (240)

Harvey (quotes from Marx):

Darwin has directed attention to the history of natural technology, i.e. the formation of the organs of plants and animals, which serve as the instruments of production for sustaining their life. Does not the history of the productive organs of man in society, of organs that are the material basis of every particular organization of society, deserve equal attention? And would not such a history be easier to compile, since, as Vico says, human history differs from natural history in that we have made the former, but not the latter? (qtd. in Harvey 190)

Technology reveals the active relation of man to nature, the direct process of the production of his life, and thereby it also lays bare the process of the production of the social relations of his life, and of the mental conceptions that flow from those relations. (qtd. in Harvey 191-2)

Marx, *Capital* volume 1:

The tailor, the locksmith, and the other artificers, being now exclusively occupied in carriage-making, each gradually loses, through want of practice, the ability to carry on, to its full extent, his old handicraft. (205)

But whatever may have been [divison of labor’s] starting point, its final form is invariably the same---a productive mechanism whose parts are human beings. (207)