---
author: Phillip Polefrone
---

How far back do the roots of the present crisis go? Where do we have to look in the history of capitalist civilization to find an explanation? Accounts from the left seem reluctant to say that the crisis began out of the blue in 2008, or even that the conditions that led to it have their origins in this millenium. To suggest that its source is so recent would be to bracket it, to allow it to be seen as an aberration remediable by insubstantial tweaks to an essentially functioning system; this account would be very favorable to the finance capitalists who are the beneficiaries of the system’s brokenness, and quite probably to nobody else. Tactics aside, such an explanation would ring patently false: as Gowan puts it, the mistake in many mainstream accounts is to suppose that “the credit crunch has been caused, rather than triggered, by a bubble in the real economy.” As such, writers on the left like Robert Brenner, David Harvey, and Peter Gowan in his “Crisis in the Heartland: Consequences of the New Wall Street System” (*NLR* 55) seek to demonstrate that the “2008 Financial Crisis” is actually a phenomenon prepared for by a longer set of historical and political events. Even these authors, though, give different starting points, and these differences point to a larger disagreement in the relationship of the current crisis to the development of capitalism. 

Much left-leaning writing, mainstream and otherwise, has looked to the past thirty or forty years to find the source. Brenner’s explanation leads from “the intensification of international competition between the mid-1960s and mid-1970s,” which marks the beginning of “a tendency towards over-capacity in the global manufacturing sector” and a decrease in the general rates of profit (9). For Gowan, the real roots of the crisis are in what might be called a response to the situation Brenner describes, the development of “the New Wall Street System that has emerged since the 1980s.” This new system is defined by emerging lender-trader relationships that allow for the rise of hedge funds and other elements of the “shadow banking” system; these types of lending, in tandem with manipulated regulatory policy, lead to increasingly risky treatments of “leverage”^[“The term ‘leverage’ refers to the relationship between a bank’s ‘equity’ or ‘capital’ and its assets---the sum that it has lent out.” (Sorry if this is well-known or obvious; it was new to me!)] unseen, Gowan claims, prior to this period. 

Harvey does not answer this probably simplistic question directly at first, and in many ways he seems to agree with both of these accounts: Brenner’s New Wall Street is a major part of Harvey’s analysis of the crisis, as is the international competition of the 1960s-’70s and the neoliberal ideologies that Harvey says “coalesced” in this period (10). Despite these agreements, though, Harvey’s account has to be said to place the source far earlier than Brenner or Gowan do. If the global nature of the crisis is constitutive of Harvey’s account---the example of German infrastructure funded by US tax dollars comes to mind---we might place the origin at the end of World War II, with the role the US dollar assumes in the international economy. But in many ways the most distinctive aspect of Harvey’s account is that he pinpoints urbanization and suburbanization as major sites of capital absorption, the process of which has undergirded much capitalist development since 19th-century France. This ongoing process, revived under Robert Moses in New York in the 1940s, in part led to the crisis of the 1960s-’70s.^[See p. 171: “The solution [capital absorption through suburbanization] was becoming the problem.”] Since, as Harvey says, the crushing suppression of labour and the subservience of the state to capital are “the solution[s] of the 1970s that [lie] at the root of the crisis of 2008-9,” and urbanization is also at the root of the recession as a global phenomenon, it would seem that Harvey’s answer to the “When did it start?” question is: with the beginning of (sub)urbanisation as a tool of capital absorption (172). This means either in the 1940s with Robert Moses, or even Baron Haussmann in 1853 France (167-9).

If this seems like a peculiarly distant explanation for the price of milk at Duane Reade (or “the price of tea in China”), it probably points to a pronounced difference in the way that Harvey views the crisis in comparison to, for example, Gowan. The difference between them is that Harvey sees the financial crisis as a result and another in a long series of capital accumulation crises, while Gowan sees something fundamentally different in this crisis when compared with those previous to it---a crisis “triggered not only by the scale of the debt bubble, but by its forms.” In Gowan’s view, the “over-the-counter derivatives” that are traded outside of the market (and are therefore not subject to market regulations) and the bundles of loans traded by CDOs create an important break with the structure of capitalism as it has existed in the past. This break “requires us to transcend the commonsense idea that changes in the so-called real economy drive outcomes in a supposed financial superstructure.” In other words, finance capitalism has become so adept at manipulating market prices and so focused on trades in the debt market rather than the market of actual tradable goods and services that it no longer bears any substantive relationship to the “supply and demand” of classical economics. Following Harvey, though, this divorce of capitalist market manipulation from what strikes one as the “real” economy of needs and goods or services has always been a feature of capitalism. Capital needs to be absorbed at any means, and if the market (or need) does not exist, capital will create it with a built environment or an ad campaign. In this view, the expansion into debt trading, the internationalization of the market, and the speed of split-second stock trades are purely the logical extension of capitalism’s need to spread always further and do it always faster: the means of achieving 3% annual growth.

Each view has aspects to recommend it. Gowan’s view that finance as it exists now is of an entirely different type from the capitalism of railroad barons seems, prima facie, to be true. When the from a mortgage in Alaska can be bundled with credit card debt from Arkansas and a series of loans from throughout the midwest and sold as part of one package by a broker on Wall Street who doesn’t even know what he or she has, I have trouble seeing it as somehow the same thing as buying physical land for development. On the other hand, this may speak to nothing more than the incomprehensible complexity of a system that must always become more complex. It is also difficult to fully accept that certain aspects of Peter Gowan’s “New Wall Street” system are indeed new. For example, he talks about the manufacture and manipulation of “bubbles” for capital gain as though this were unique to the latter half of the 20th century. Without claiming expertise on the history of finance capital, I can say that this exact manipulation is narrated in some detail in Theodore Dreiser’s novel *The Financier*, based on the life of the 19th-century capitalist Charles Yerkes. (Someone whose fortune would be made by a combination of speculative bubble-bursting and railroad investments, incidentally; different though the types of finance may appear, they seem to be able to coexist.) Certainly the regulatory situation of the last forty years appears to have moved from increasing to decreasing regulation, and the combination of this legal terrain and technological innovations that have developed contemporaneously have led to new contortions of finance. But I am inclined to say, with Harvey: nothing new under the sun.
