---
author: Phillip Polefrone
date: April 16, 2014
---

I’d like to consider the critiques that each of this week’s texts level at the other’s preferred way of reading, in part because I find both ways compelling and in part because both critiques strike me as lackluster. Another way of putting it would be that the positive elements of each manifesto seem able to stand independent of the negativities they build from.

This may seem a peculiar statement given that Marcus and Best are coining their Surface Reading so many years after Jameson’s *The Political Unconscious*, but Jameson anticipates many of the objections Marcus and Best level at his method. Though they are by no means the “ordinary readers” uncomfortable with “elaborate and ingenious interpretations” (as are the imaginary interlocutors Jameson ungenerously assumes his dissenters will be), the objection Jameson anticipates sounds a lot like what Marcus and Best propose. Marcus’s “just reading” is indeed very similar to the assertion that Jameson presents as his opposition, “that the text means just what it says” (Jameson 60, Marcus and Best 12). Does Jameson’s anticipatory counterpoint stand up to this objection, then? His response is twofold. First, that the sheer morass of information and media means that there is necessarily a greater degree of “mystification” than ever before. He parenthetically buttresses, but does not argumentatively support, this assertion with Talleyrand’s notion that language is always a means of obscuring thought. The objection to “literal meaning” thus relies on a notion of *language itself* as always obfuscating that is far from clear and infinitely less compelling than the rest of the arguments regarding repression and obfuscation, which strike me as quite different. Jameson’s second counter to literal reading is that the search for and formulation of meaning runs into the hermeneutic problem, which as I understand it is to say that the application of a specific hermeneutic will only ever tick the boxes that it itself has drawn (which will always be as limited and circumscribed by ideology as the text itself). But, in a way, this rebuke begs the question. To level this critique presumes a critical operation identical with the one that Jameson has already set up, and so the statement becomes tautological: this type of reading cannot transcend the hermeneutic problem because it does not transcend the hermeneutic problem.

And yet, as I have already mentioned, the objection Marcus and Best level does not strike me as entirely fair to the type of reading that Jameson actually outlines in the later sections of “On Interpretation,” either. They contend that, in Jameson’s view, “interpretation should seek a repressed, mystified, latent meaning behind a manifest one” (5); as I understand him, though, he pinpoints the search for “meaning” as precisely the aspect of any interpretation that leads to the hermeneutic problem he’s objecting to. We could take as prima facie evidence for this the frequency with which he himself puts the word “meaning” in scare quotes. Certainly both the “weak” and “strong” forms of interpretation begin and end with “meaning,” but I’m not sure the system he’s creating in *The Political Unconscious* is a form of “interpretation” as it is defined here. Each of the three levels of reading he outlines in the third section would seem to take meaning as a foreign element. The centerpiece of his reading practice, the search for contradiction,^[I’m not sure I am entirely convinced by the presumption of contradiction, but not for the reasons outlined in “Surface Reading: An Introduction.” If anything I wonder if it’s another sort of false homology.] could even be taken as anti-meaning, the place where that fundamental question of interpretation falls short. The reading practices that Marcus and Best object to look more akin to the lineage leading directly from psychoanalysis, and I love their methods as a way to avoid that practice. But the Jameson I’ve been reading does not seem to be the perpetrator of those readings.