---
author: Phillip Polefrone
date: April 2nd, 2014
---

I would like to focus less on the things that Etienne Balibar discusses in *Masses, Classes, Ideas* than on a particular heuristic he uses, possibly the defining heuristic of the work: the use of productive aporiae and internal contradictions as sites of meaning.^[There may very well be a long intellectual history of this method, but it’s new to me!] It is a method of which he is quite aware, and which he himself points out in his preface: he says that he seeks “to elicit clarification of the central *aporiae* of Marxism itself and ways to get out of them,” a goal that arises because he is “concentrated on the *intellectual* implications of Marxism” (ix).

Prefacing his essay on Spinoza, for example, Balibar says that the method is useful because “it is precisely these aporiae that allow him to frame a realistic concept of freedom” (xii). He invites us to consider the *Political Treatise* “not as the execution of a pre-established, perfectly coherent plan, already certain of its conclusions, but as an experiment in thought, or better yet, a theoretical experiment fraught with its own internal difficulties….” Doing so draws us away from refutations and disqualifications, “forbid[ding] our finding in him a kind of circular thought in which initial theoretical principles are never anything but the abstract anticipation of the conclusions” (18). In this case, Balibar takes internal contradiction as a foundation for his reading of Spinoza’s democracy, seeming to assimilate the aporia into Spinoza’s system itself. At another point---the aporetic fireworks of the essay---Balibar points out that the “solution” to the problem of democracy “has never occurred except in theory, and in reality it is not rigorously thinkable in Spinozist terms” (31). Here aporia appears to conflict with the Spinozist system, until later it is again justified: Spinoza’s project itself changes, becoming not “a failed attempt to *define* the democratic state, but…an unequaled effort rigorously to think democracy as the *transformation of the state*” (33). Here the use of aporia as a heuristic allows Balibar to transcend the limitations to thought presented either by the terms of Spinoza’s own inquiry or the assumptions, on the part of the reader, of what type of thing democracy is; the latter *type* of assumption may also (it is not clear) be the limiting factor of Spinoza’s terms of inquiry. 

Balibar’s use of aporia in “In Search of the Proletariat” is similar in many senses, and is again central to a conceptual redefinition of a term just as lofty as “democracy”: “capitalism.” Because capitalism is subject to “historicity” and determination by historical conditions, Balibar concludes, its own “history” is unable to be analyzed (a formulation, I have to confess, that I fail to understand). Balibar arrives at this point through a mostly philological approach to the appearances of the words “proletariat,” “mass,” and “class,” exposing these terms as sets of contradictions in themselves. The way this particular set of contradictions and aporiae plays out in his reading of Marx and Engels more generally, though, leads to a slightly different response on Balibar’s part to that which defined his reading of Spinoza. In the first place, the motivation for tracing these terms appears to come from a desire to systematize (or point out the problems of systematizing) the notoriously fragmented works of Marx. As such, the contradiction arises only in trying to draw lines between the *Manifesto* and *Capital*, to incorporate them as part of the same coherent body. This, crucially, leads to a non-productive aporia from Marx and Engels that Balibar appears to condemn: the “imaginary representation of the ‘proletariat’…in order to conjure away the menacing irruption of the real” (148). By referring to “unresolvable contradictions” and concluding with an apology for them (“this is the price that had to be paid for opening the new continent of thought”), Balibar implicitly affirms that this particular aporia cannot be taken as totally productive, as contradictions the tension of which lead in themselves to transformation, as they were in Spinoza. 

The question remains as to whether these aporiae just exist everywhere, whether Balibar has deliberately selected works with interesting aporiae, or whether they can be found in most places if one searches for them. But the usefulness of the method is difficult to dispute based on where Balibar is able to get as a result.