---
author: Phillip Polefrone
date: April 23, 2014
---

I’ve found it helpful to contextualize this week’s readings by revisiting some of our previous texts that deal with the world-systems theories of Wallerstein and Arrighi, more specifically Joan Martinez-Alier and Stephen G. Bunker from our week on ecology. I think it’s interesting to use questions of scale to juxtapose the world ecology (or the world of ecologies) with the world-system of capitalism. As Wallerstein’s major interest in his essay is to define the proper “unit of analysis” with which to discuss systems, this is a topic especially relevant to him. I’m particularly startled by Wallerstein’s idea that no system smaller than a world-system, what he calls a “mini-system,” currently exists or possibly could. From an ecological standpoint, this would appear to be precisely the problem: as Bunker puts it, “Social production, natural production, and the extraction that mediates between them are inextricably linked, but once the exchange of commodities breaks out of the boundaries of single ecosystems and allows social production to draw on energy and matter produced in multiple ecosystems, the logic and dynamic of the three processes become increasingly distinct” (255). This situation differs from the “original” arrangement in which extraction and production “occurred together in social formations bounded by a single regional ecosystem” (254). Note that the sizes of these ecosystems are not mutable in the way Wallerstein’s units of analysis are, exactly: they do not fluctuate in size alongside social systems and historical market forces. When systems defined by markets and division of labor are incorporated into an economic world-system, and thus begin to operate on a scale that exceeds the ecosystems that define “natural production,” economic activity begins to disrupt the ecosystems it sprawls across in the manner that Bunker describes. Combining Wallerstein’s terms with Marx’s (via Foster), we might say that the “social metabolism” can only be maintained in a “mini-system” that corresponds to the material flows and scale of the ecosystem in which that mini-system occurs. Such a correspondence would prevent situations like those described by Martinez-Alier, in which the extraction costs cause uneven development at the expense of the exporting ecosystem (232). I’d also be curious in these terms about environmental externalities caused by the accidental and intentional transportation of organisms across ecosystems---a material transfer of biomass unrelated to trade, and under some circumstances even detrimental to it. Do we approach by these transfers a world ecosystem, or do we already inhabit a world of regional ecosystems disrupted by interrelation? I wish that weren’t a rhetorical question. 

This has not touched on Arrighi or Balakrishnan. I’ll say briefly that I find the scientific material analysis of Bunker and Martinez-Alier a much more compelling model for productive interdisciplinarity than the retrograde application of evolutionary concepts to historical processes Balakrishnan describes in Azar Gat’s *War in Human Civilization*. Balakrishnan is very effective in deflating Gat’s argument with the very science Gat claims to appropriate or extend. We could perhaps take Arrighi’s framing of war and expansion, as either “territorialist” ends or part of a “capitalist” means (35), as the type of cultural answer to the “war” question that Gat ignores in favor of the “natural” answer of evolutionary theory out of context. 