---
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
date: April 30, 2014
---

What if the revolution is a matter of escape? What if the first step is not deciding what you want to build---not the construction of a careful, fragile utopian vision---but finding a way to live outside of what already exists? Hart and Negri, Clark, and Gibson-Graham all either pose such questions or imply them, and I want to focus on them in this response because it seems like a first step in dealing with the reality of the total system (or of the system that appears total, as Gibson-Graham might have it). The need to escape or get beyond seems to inform the opening impulse of *Declaration* to “name the present,” demarcating the groups of oppressed as they exist now. The indebted, the mediatized, the securitized, the represented; in their way, each of these categories are circumscriptions of a limited realm of political possibility, or a limiting horizon of ways that one can live. To the indebted goes opportunity, but only with a Faustian contract, while to the mediatized goes a promise of endless freedom of information, but only with the monetization of their attention—that knowledge is transmuted to commodity, and that freedom is an apple of Sodom, shriveling when picked. The securitized live in a state that preserves itself only if they submit to the possibility of being outside that state, excepted, if their own preservation conflicts with the state’s; similarly the represented are heard only if they adhere to what is representable. Thus the suggestion in the discussion of the “securitized” (somewhat buried, at least in section one) that we find a way to disappear, to create an un-surveilled space, points to a *sine qua non* of any political action to follow. In sympathy with Badiou’s definition of an “event” as the doing of the impossible and, therefore, the creation of new possibilities, we must get beyond the demarcations of these categories and the material constraints that define them. 

For Gibson-Graham this is a matter of refiguring our understanding of what the Left opposes and rejiggering the definition of capitalism, and in a sense this links her methodologically with T. J. Clark’s idea that theory can “set the key” for activism and material struggle. But in both cases the theoretical reworking is a matter of finding possibilities, detecting spaces of resistance or seams that can be torn to make those spaces. Gibson-Graham’s sense of the total capitalist system is as an idea leading to the Left’s failure to mobilize, creating as it does a monolith that can only be toppled by the coming of a future revolution and discouraging action. T. J. Clark seems to be responding to a similar stagnation in the face of monolith, hence his skepticism of the “future” or utopia as a politically useful concept and his call for the “tragic key” to galvanize resistance. I meet both of these needs to dismantle the monolithic system and make way for material action with palpable relief---“What can one do inside a total system?” is an exhausting and hopeless question, specifically when one thinks that if some redeeming revolution were going to happen of its own accord, it would have done so already. But more to the point, both of these more theoretical interventions devote themselves to making space for resistance by getting outside of the systems and limiting heuristics that exist in order to, if not make something new, then at least begin dismantling what is old. I am significantly less optimistic, or even patient, with the idea of Occupy than Hart and Negri seem to be, but they have won me over at least to its significance in this respect.