---
author: Phillip Polefrone
date: April 9, 2014
---

I want to focus on one of the common elements between Rancière and Badiou that I find at once exciting and a bit disconcerting. I refer to the idea that political change can only come from without: that only those uncounted by the political census or consensus are eligible for politics in Rancière; and in Badiou, according to the concepts underlying “The Idea of Communism” derived from his earlier work (which he helpfully summarizes), that the change in State (an “event”) must come from beyond what is even inscribed as possible by the existing State. These concepts excite me because of passages like the one at the bottom of page 305 of “Who is the Subject…?” in which “clandestine immigrants” and “populations in the camps of refugees” are not only respected as political agents, but are in fact the only eligible “political” actors. But when I ask what this would mean on the level of praxis, I no longer know what to think. Do the sit-ins in Birmingham count as one of Badiou’s “events”? Was such an event “impossible” enough, prior to that action, for it to qualify? If such action has to come from the realm of impossibility, any change within the existing channels fails to qualify; does women’s suffrage not count as an event, then? Or was the agitation that led to it an instance of the “impossible” because, in organizing, they were already representing themselves in a way un-allowed for by the State? I am unsure if organization of the unrecognized counts as political action in Rancière’s sense. I am also unsure whether doing that which is impossible under the State, in Badiou’s sense, must constitute violating law, and to take it one step further, under what circumstances it will and must end in violent resistance. In cases of what Nancy Fraser calls “recognition,” it appears that violence is not inevitable: even *being* an apparently impossible subject is an event, an unwillingness to concede validity to the system that disallows such being. I can think of no way that “redistribution” in Fraser’s sense could be achieved without violence and thus constitute an “event” à la Badiou, however, since beyond state-enforced taxation, all that remains is the forceful seizure of property. Without saying that I’m categorically against armed resistance (I’m not, I don’t think), the impossibility of action within the system as it stands is difficult to accept without serious thought.

If these thoughts are marked, first, by confusion, and second, by an anxiety over practical application, it points to a somewhat broader question about how to make Rancière and (to a lesser extent) Badiou “useful” in a political sense. Call it an attempt at translation between theory and implied praxis. I find the ideas of dissensus and consensus in Rancière extremely evokative and useful, but defining metapolitics in terms of “the true as the truth of the false,” even in context, seems like paradox for the sake of paradox. Similarly, in Badiou, he spends so much time defining the contours of the Idea that I have lost track of what he means when he says “communism.” (We know that it starts, perhaps, with Plato, and we know that it is *not* the things he doesn’t want to associate it with.) This response may amount to nothing more than a statement of preference for the projects of people like David Harvey, E.P. Thompson, Nancy Fraser, and John Bellamy Foster. It may also amount only to an identification of difficulty. It does seem worth asking, however, whether there is an obligation to consider practicality when making work with political commitments.