---
author: Phillip Polefrone
date: 5 Feb. 2014
---

*The New Left Review* has had a tortuous thematic life since its inception in 1956, as evidenced by its own extensive article on its intellectual history.[^1 http://newleftreview.org/history] Without seeming to lose sight of its political and ideological commitments, it has shifted its focus in response to the defining issues of a changing present: it has opposed or supported regimes of political thought and power; it has become more or less radical as its editors saw fit; it has fluctuated between the poles of the theoretical and the pragmatic, appealing to intellectuals and activists alike. The mainlines of the present conversation in *NLR* are no less distinct. The journal has covered the rising militarism of major powers in general and the U.S. in particular. It has covered the current economic crisis in terms of its effect on individual nations and the international community, and has been particularly helpful in finding the correspondence between the two (the role of Germany in the European crisis, for example, has been much discussed). In a changing technological landscape, the journal has featured voices from the tech sector, for example that of Rob Lucas, parsing changing culture in a Marxist light. In the more physical realm of culture, several interesting articles have emerged on a changing urbanism in response to increasing urban ultra-wealth on one hand and economic devastation on the other (see Alessi Dell'Umbria's "The Sinking of Marseille" in *NLR* 75). Throughout, criticism of film, art, and literature maintain a major presence, with documentary film emerging as a major topic of productive discourse. One thread emerges, however, that undergirds many of these other concerns: the stagnation of the left in response to the increasingly intractable gains of global capitalism and the extent to which this stagnation must itself be considered part of the present crisis.

Of the many essays touching on this sense of stagnation explicitly or implicitly, T. J. Clark's "For a Left with No Future" (*NLR* 74) and Nancy Fraser's "A Triple Movement?" (*NLR* 81) are a particularly interesting pair. In the first place, while they agree that the stagnation of the left is itself part of the current political crisis, they provide two viable possibilities in specifying its cause. Clark's interpretation of the problem with the contemporary left presumes a unified front---and a universal cause of its failure. This assumption of unity frames the essay, appearing in statements such as "By 'left' I mean a root-and-branch opposition to capitalism" and "[t]he word 'left' in my usage refers, of course, to a tradition of politics hardly represented any longer in the governments and oppositions we have." While it is easy to say that this invocation of the unified left is a simplification, or as Clark himself puts it "a term denoting an absence" or "near non-existence," the totalizing gesture allows him to suggest ways to bring this absent left into actual existence. The embodied left that he envisions has three (related) major characteristics: recognition of the present failure to implement leftist aims and a consequent "tragic" tone, renunciation of a Utopian focus on the future in favor of the present and the past, and willingness to recognize what he frames as inevitable "human nature" in order to more effectively contain it---including an unsettling acceptance of perpetual violent struggle. This view of a (potentially) unified front seems to derive from his view of the relationship of theory and practice, in which theory "establishes the key of politics for a moment, and even points to a possible new one." His vision not only unifies leftist theory and activism in a chain of political causation, but also implies a unified theory and a unified activism independently. A version of the leftist project that has this binary structure can escape stagnation, as he suggests in conclusion, by returning to the direct action, a direct action made possible by the clarity of a binary opposition.

Where Clark finds the left lacking because of its unified orientation toward the future, Nancy Fraser sees a left defeating itself, too divided by its own conflicting aims to offer meaningful opposition to the manifold forces of capital. She begins by asking why Karl Polanyi's model of the "double movement" in the '30s, in which "political parties and social movements coalesced around one side or the other of a simple fault-line," fails to describe the left's response to the present crisis. This "simple fault-line" led to a clear opposition over the question of regulation, an opposition of the type that Clark still presumes in his vision of a unified left. Before landing on an explanation internal to the left to explain their stagnation, Fraser tests and dismisses several externally oriented hypotheses---she rejects in turn a failure of leadership, the decline of nationalization in the face of globalization, and the altered "frame" of economic activity undercutting the management of national economies. Finally, she shows that the divided priorities of the left, between "recognition" and emancipation on one side and "redistribution" and protection on the other, have counteracted each other. In reacting against the conservative assumptions underlying many forms of social protection (a "family wage," for example), those supporting a politics of emancipation sometimes aligned themselves with de-regulation and marketization, undercutting the basis of social protection. Because the far-right Tea Partiers have co-opted the rhetoric of liberation, the emancipation wing of the left finds itself with different rhetorical and spiritual bedfellows. The two-poled model of Polanyi's Depression, then, fails to describe the present crisis because of "the missing third," the politics of emancipation. The clear opposition of Clark's crisis is a misdiagnosis, and the unidirectional push defeats itself. Given this complication, Fraser's solution is to reformulate the left's conception of redistribution and protection so that it no longer violates the needs of emancipation. Recognition and redistribution may be different goals, but they need not be opposed: "Henceforth, no protection without emancipation."

The differences between these two ways of seeing the left's crisis leads to an important distinction between the way Clark and Fraser relate to the semiotic sphere of rhetoric and theory versus the more basic, material sphere of economic activity and political action. As mentioned above, Clark makes a clear statement of the relationship of theory and practice, in which theory is able to determine tone, strategy, and direction on a high level, which eventually determines the "key" of more direct politics. This understanding is reflected in the material he uses to make his argument as well as the type of argument he eventually makes. Throughout, he is focused on questions such as "tone" and "key," taking as his evidence elements of superstructure almost entirely---Bruegel, Nietzsche, A. C. Bradley's theory of tragedy; not the violence of an era, but the implications of a textbook entitled *The Era of Violence*. Examining the trend in leftist *theory* leads Clark to his diagnosis, but the solution he recommends is inherently situated in material practice. Considering the idea of tragedy leads him to "armed resistance" as a way of changing the overriding political understanding of violence; his more general recommendation is to recognize "all the ills the flesh is heir to" as a way of making material practice more pragmatic. To generalize, Clark uses semiotic evidence to argue for material change. Fraser's approach is almost a neat inversion. Though her final suggestion is a revision of the way two leftist theories interact, she arrives there via material analysis of economic and political activity (with the possible exception of her consideration of leftist "leadership"; even this analysis, though, boils down to a failure of this leadership to make substantive claims about material changes). Though the idea of "framing" economic activity and conflict between nationalism versus globalization are abstract in themselves, she uses them to make arguments based on concrete economic matters such as managed currency and the basic differences between industrialization and financialization on labor disputes. In contrast to Clark, Fraser uses material evidence to make claims on a higher, semiotic level of theory. 

This difference between Clark and Fraser may seem trivial on the surface, but in fact it reflects a larger concern in the essays of *New Left Review* and leftist writing more generally: the relationship of abstract theory to the "real world" of political activism and material practice. Put another way, these two approaches reveal two possible ways of handling the distinction between base and superstructure in leftist writing. Clark's model would seem to suggest that by making interventions at the level of superstructure---revealing possible undercurrent's of a Bruegel painting---movements devoted to material change can be strengthened and pushed out of stagnation. Fraser's essay presents a very different opinion. In her piece, changing the base requires arguments arising from the base. Certainly both approaches contribute to the richness of leftist dialogue more generally, but the usefulness of superstructural analysis to a situation recognized as crisis is a mainline of leftist metacommentary, and will likely continue to be.
