I want to bring together the coevolution of the “activity spheres” described in Harvey’s *Enigma of Capital* with the coevolution and social metabolism of Marx in Foster’s *Marx’s Ecology*. Put another way, I want to bring a slightly more materialist and overtly environmental perspective to bear on what are mostly social understandings of space in Harvey. The bridge between these two would be the ecological takes on world-systems theory provided by Bunker and Martinez-Alier from our ecology week: both of them discuss the global flow of trade and industry in terms of its effects on ecology. 

Following the lead of the world-systems ecologists, I think I can do a comparison of the “units of analysis” proper to ecological processes and those proper to capital, showing that the development of global capital Harvey, Wallerstein, and to a lesser extent Arrighi describe will always constitute an increase in the “rift” in Marx’s “social metabolism” because of an incompatibility of scales. While influenced by larger-scale material interchanges, ecologies tend to be regional while, as Wallerstein points out, regional “mini-systems” no longer exist and are currently impossible. Harvey and Wallerstein also show that the development of cities (or the “town” of the town-and-country in Marx’s social metabolism) tends to be determined according to global structures of capital flow, hegemony, and the need for capital absorption; this means that the coevolution of town and country, of the built environment with the natural environment, will always be out of step, because the built environment is being developed according to forces on a global scale while the natural environment operates according to a fixed scale defined by regional ecologies. To return to Harvey’s system of coevolution then: we have to ask what scale it takes place on and how it will account for material interchanges between urban and natural space. Implicitly his system is taking place on a global scale, as the system he describes is a world-system, but it is unclear on what scale the guided “coevolution” or “co-revolution” of his seven spheres are supposed to take place. I think I want to argue that this co(r)evolution should happen in units more adherent to the regional ecologies in which it will always take place in order to at least allow for a repaired town-country metabolism. Such a metabolic reparation would be necessary for a return to “actual labor” of use value production to be initiated and a self-sustenance outside of the (presumably still capitalist at first) world economy to be feasible. Thus while Harvey’s cultural co(r)evolution can indeed and probably must happen on a global scale (see Mao?), the material substratum of it would need to happen on the level indicated by Marx’s social metabolism and the bounds of regional ecologies.